people working in these canneries could barely stay there all day because of the smell, but you know what they came out saying?
now, when an ecologist looks at the ocean -- i have to tell you -- we look at the ocean in a very different way, and we see different things than when a regular person looks at the ocean because when an ecologist looks at the ocean, we see all those interconnections.
we see the base of the food chain, the plankton, the small things, and we see how those animals are food to animals in the middle of the pyramid, and on so up this diagram.
now why does that matter for human health?
they get into the food chain.
and we also are eating meat that comes from some of these same places.
and that huge load was passing into the people that ate this meat.
it turns out that a lot of dolphins are being sold as meat in the whale meat market around the world.
i remember sitting at my desk being about the only person in the world who knew that whale meat being sold in these markets was really dolphin meat, and it was toxic.
that means that the beach might have great waves, but it's a dangerous place for surfers to be because they can carry with them, even after a great day of surfing, this legacy of an infection that might take a very long time to solve.
these are things that are getting into our food chain because of these blooms.
but in fact, if you look around the world, not only are there hope spots for where we may be able to fix problems, there have been places where problems have been fixed, where people have come to grips with these issues and begun to turn them around.
it happened because many people put their time and effort and their pioneering spirit into this.
and it's only through having the ocean being healthy that we can remain healthy ourselves.
they get up just a little bit later every day -- say 15 minutes or so -- and they kind of drift all the way around the clock like this over the course of the weeks.
ak: well actually i prefer to say that it's an object constructed out of wood and cloth with movement built into it to persuade you to believe that it has life.
and when we met at art school and fell in love in 1971, i hated puppets.
the horse is sold to the first world war, and he joins up to find his horse.
it had to have a rider.
but they agreed to go along with it for a while.
so we began with a test.
the weight is really difficult when it's up above your head.
but we didn't realize at the time that we actually needed a third manipulator, because we couldn't manipulate the neck from inside and walk the horse at the same time.
we were going to test-drive it on the street outside of our house in cape town, and it got to midnight and we hadn't done that yet.
and we sent it off to the national theatre, hoping that they believed that we created something that worked.
we opened the lid, we took the horse out, and it did work; it walked and it was able to be ridden.
it had by no means got the green light yet.
and so the show was given the green light.
so here are some half-finished horses ready to be worked in london.
stand here where people can see you.
but he also controls the head directly by using his hand.
so he made a channel in here, and the chest moves up and down in that channel.
if i were to touch the horse here on his skin, the heart puppeteer can shake the body from inside and get the skin to quiver.
and i would like you to believe that it was an aesthetic choice, that i was making a three-dimensional drawing of a horse that somehow moves in space.
and so it was a very practical reason why it was made of cane.
or if you light it from above, it becomes more solid.
the guys inside the horse have to be able to see out.
they have to be able to act along with their fellow actors in the production.
but now we would like you to put joey through some paces.
the sound that that very large chest makes, of the horse -- the whinnying and the nickering and everything -- that starts usually with one performer, carries on with a second person and ends with a third.
i want to start with these word pairs here.
we all know which side of these we'd like to be on.
in fact they would never have thought of themselves as closed and set in their ways, as slow to respond to new challenges, as small and risk-averse.
this report is our main public report.
what it tells is the story of how today actually could be as historic as 100 years ago.
what i want to do is share some of the coolest things that are going on with you.
this is a moment in history when the average person has more power than at any time.
he said, "we have lived in this world where little things are done for love and big things for money.
suddenly big things can be done for love."
it's one of the best known of these new marketplaces where a donor can go straight into a classroom and connect with what a teacher says they need.
take a look at changing the present, started by a tedster, next time you need a wedding present or a holiday present.
and it goes on and on.
we have got to realize that it is going to take a long time to do these things.
is there a frontier for us of how we live together?
we are going to need a new generation of citizen leaders willing to commit ourselves to growing and changing and learning as rapidly as possible.
that's why i have one last thing i want to show you.
this is a photograph taken about 100 years ago of my grandfather and great-grandfather.
and i want you to imagine that this a photograph of you.
and i want you to think about the community that you want to be part of creating.
what is the story you most want for them to tell?
and something that i see happening is something that i would like to call a sort of "democratization of intimacy."
and what do i mean by that?
the pictures that you're seeing behind me are people that i visited in the last few months.
and i asked them to come along with the person they communicate with most.
one young woman brought her grandfather.
there are three stories that i think are quite good examples.
and so he starts working every morning at four o'clock in the morning.
he just wants to wish her a good day, because that's the start of her day.
and they have a big event of it.
but danny miller, who is a very good anthropologist who is working on filipina migrant women who leave their children back in the philippines, was telling me about how much parenting is going on through skype, and how much these mothers are engaged with their children through skype.
and then there is the third couple.
but it could be in a school, it could be an administration, it could be a hospital.
if you were not, you maybe had to go through an operator.
but the expectation was once you moved in there your commitment was fully to the task at hand, fully to the people around you.
and this has become such a cultural norm that we actually school our children for them to be capable to do this cleavage.
if you think nursery, kindergarten, first years of school are just dedicated to take away the children, to make them used to staying long hours away from their family.
when people basically had to go somewhere else to work and carry out the work.
they were living on top of the land they were laboring.
they were living on top of the workshops where they were working.
so the lower the status of the job and of the person carrying out, the more removed he would be from his personal sphere.
and they are doing it massively.
i really think that the number is conservative.
the first one is happening right here in chicago.
we know that two-thirds of them are going to go back.
they have not enough water on most days and too much to handle when it rains.
how you get it shouldn't make that much of a difference.
her family has eight generations in a town called whitesville, west virginia.
it can make a mountain go from this to this in a few short months.
when we visited, it gave some of the people we were with this strange little cough after being only there for just a few hours or so -- not just miners, but everybody.
the water is turned into goo.
and it has since moved to her bones and her brain.
and i just find it so bizarre that she's suffering from the same thing that she tried so hard to protect people from.
but her dream of coal river mountain wind is her legacy.
and she might not get to see that mountaintop.
they're all problem solvers, and they're just some of the many examples that i really am privileged to see, meet and learn from in the examples of the work that i do now.
and there are plenty of other examples like that.
and where is this waste handled?
and in my hometown, we actually tried to do one of these in the bronx, but our mayor decided what he wanted to see was a jail on that same spot.
and we want to shift the systems that open the doors for people who were formerly tax burdens to become part of the tax base.
and we all need to be invested in it.
now is the time for us to act in our own communities where we think local and we act local.
and reading that book made me reexamine that theory because i need to explain what i mean by that.
so you need to help him out.
and i'm a grown woman now, and i have learned a few things along the way.
but during that time, i realized that it was about projects and developing them on the local level that really was going to do the right thing for our communities.
the greater our success, the less money came in from foundations.
but i did in fact get married in it.
there goes my dog who led me to the park in my wedding.
it is time that we start building living monuments to hope and possibility.
most people don't know that when i went to high school in this country -- i applied for university at a time when i was convinced i was going to be an artist and be a sculptor.
my family was wealthy, and my father believed in one thing, and that was to give us all as much education as we wanted.
and i announced i wanted to be a sculptor in paris.
and he was a clever man.
and i thought that was the best deal in town, so i accepted it immediately.
he said to me something that just went completely over my head.
so they go around in this loop, which is why you see them up there.
so this was great for us because it was a real turning point.
but one thing we learned was that these kids can absolutely jump into it just the same way as our kids do here.
we all need help, even those of us who are very seasoned.
this is in the early 2000s.
and the reason being a nonprofit is important is actually twofold.
and the second is very counterintuitive -- you can get the best people in the world.
you get the people who are doing it because they believe in the mission, and they're the best people.
it allows you to team up with people.
it was getting its power in a different way.
and then, i could tell you lots about the laptop, but i decided on just four things.
we were using it at lunch today in the sunlight, and the more sunlight the better.
the most important being that it is the best way to make an inexpensive product.
these can talk to each other.
you just look at some of the languages.
and this is the big difference.
so we went to ethiopia, and we helped them make a keyboard.
so what i want to end with is sort of what we're doing to roll it out.
we went to the six, and in each case the head of state said he would do it, he'd do a million.
and so i went to each of those countries at least six times, met with the head of state probably two or three times.
this was a period in my life where i was traveling 330 days per year.
in the case of libya, it was a lot of fun meeting qaddafi in his tent.
so we went to smaller ones.
and so what happens is, these things start to happen with these countries -- still not enough.
we thought that was a good time to announce it.
we said it would be just for a short period until the 26.
the first day it was just wild.
i want you do something else.
and if each one of you sends it to 300 or 400 people, that would be fantastic.
it will be 100 in two years.
but it was the countries that wanted it to go up, and we let them push it up for all sorts of reasons.
i just want to end with one last one.
a couple of years ago, i read an article by new york times writer michael pollan in which he argued that growing even some of our own food is one of the best things that we can do for the environment.
now at the time that i was reading this, it was the middle of the winter and i definitely did not have room for a lot of dirt in my new york city apartment.
so i was basically just willing to settle for just reading the next wired magazine and finding out how the experts were going to figure out how to solve all these problems for us in the future.
but that was actually exactly the point that michael pollan was making in this article -- was it's precisely when we hand over the responsibility for all these things to specialists that we cause the kind of messes that we see with the food system.
now light and temperature vary with each window's microclimate, so a window farm requires a farmer, and she must decide what kind of crops she is going to put in her window farm, and whether she is going to feed her food organically.
so to bring on more co-developers, what we did was we created a social media site on which we published the designs, we explained how they worked, and we even went so far as to point out everything that was wrong with these systems.
and then we invited people all over the world to build them and experiment with us.
and we have window farms all over the world.
and window farmers in finland have been customizing their window farms for the dark days of the finnish winters by outfitting them with led grow lights that they're now making open source and part of the project.
and we're able to look out for the needs of newcomers.
what we get out of this project is we get support for our own work, as well as an experience of actually contributing to the environmental movement in a way other than just screwing in new light bulbs.
if we really want to see the kind of wide consumer behavior change that we're all talking about as environmentalists and food people, maybe we just need to ditch the term "consumer" and get behind the people who are doing stuff.
so we ask that you join us in rediscovering the value of citizens united, and to declare that we are all still pioneers.
are they going to be around in 50 years?
at the bottom right is one that i built in my lab about 10 years ago, and we finally turned that into a product.
and let me just show you that.
this is a robot that you can go out and buy, and that will clean up your floor.
a soldier gives it a command to go upstairs, and it does.
that was not a controlled descent.
but we did go into all the surrounding buildings that had been evacuated, and searched for possible survivors in the buildings that were too dangerous to go into.
the worst thing that's happened in the cave so far was one of the robots fell down ten meters.
so now i brought this up in front of him.
now see if you can put it back together.
and it looks for things that move around.
and it looks right at that.
and it gets bored, so it will then look away at something else.
then we put in turn taking.
so we put this in the robot.
i want to show you my watch."
i almost lost it this week.
and the other question people ask me is, will they want to take over?
500 years ago we had to give up the idea that we are the center of the universe when the earth started to go around the sun; 150 years ago, with darwin, we had to give up the idea we were different from animals.
but we're going to come to accept it over the next 50 years or so.
they want to take over from us.
before that has to come to be a mildly bad robot, and before that a not so bad robot.
and we're just not going to let it go that way.
so a friend of mine who's a political scientist, he told me several months ago exactly what this month would be like.
he told me that a few months ago.
they just fought off a king.
the dark blue line is how much the government spends.
the light blue line is how much the government gets in.
we can just raise taxes a bit and close that gap, especially if we raise taxes on the rich.
and i can get really despairing.
they even like medicaid, even though that goes to the poor and indigent, which you might think would have less support.
but that is not the case at all.
now we get to fight about all sorts of other issues.
and in fact, there's this other group of people who are not as divided as people might think, and that group is economists.
it's still ugly to this day, but in my experience, it is really, really hard to find an economist under 40 who still has that kind of way of seeing the world.
and that part of it has not changed.
and that gets me back to the dollar, and it gets me back to reminding myself that we know this experience.
the fear is that the world is watching.
the fear is that the longer we delay any solution, the more the world will look to the u.s.
and so just the act of compromise itself, and sustained, real compromise, would give us even more time, would allow both sides even longer to spread out the pain and reach even more compromise down the road.
and why does it matter so much to us?
and from that point on, from my age at the time, i began to think of things in a different way.
and so i then moved on into my design career and began to find some exciting things.
do you remember when lights used to just go on and off, click click, when you closed the door in a car?
do you remember the first time you were in a car and it did that?
so i started to ask myself questions about it.
and so i did some experiments.
and i suddenly realized that there was something that did exactly that -- light to dark in six seconds -- exactly that.
do you know what it is?
and would you do me a favor?
for the next 14 minutes or whatever it is, will you feel stuff?
i don't need you to think so much as i want you to feel it.
and that thing that i found was the cinema or the theater.
i get a sense of anticipation"?
and some of the people i speak to that have never seen a movie or been to the theater don't get it in the same way.
so this leads me to think of this in a different way.
so how do we make that actually work?
this is one of the most beautiful things i know.
what are you feeling about it?
this is the last act on this earth of a little girl called heidi, five years old, before she died of cancer to the spine.
look at the beauty in it.
now when talking about beauty you can't get away from the fact that a lot experiments have been done in this way with faces and what have you.
this is a more interesting one where half faces were shown to some people, and then to add them into a list of most beautiful to least beautiful and then exposing a full face.
and they found that it was almost exact coincidence.
now i can feel a sensation of delight and beauty if i look at that eye.
this is just the bit that protrudes into our physical dimension.
and then i can't tell you how hard it is to do that radiator, which is curved.
because i know we need to bring the wheel farther into the aerodynamics.
but unfortunately, the likes of me and people that are like me have to deal with compromise all the time with beauty.
we have to deal with it.
did you see what i did?
i moved three things by a millimeter.
and only a few people can do it.
this one, as long as you know what water is like then you can experience this.
i might like it more than you like it, because i know how bloody hard it is to do it.
and part of the joy of it is, you know the difficulty.
did you think that was a bicycle when i showed it to you at the first flash?
did you think it was modern?
it wins or loses at that point.
do you want to see it again?
but how do you feel about it?
we really need to put the best we have to offer within reach of our children.
they're going to learn from whatever it is they have around them.
i'm a librarian, and what i'm trying to do is bring all of the works of knowledge to as many people as want to read it.
but with the industriousness of the egyptians, they were able to build the library of alexandria -- the idea of a copy of every book of all the peoples of the world.
the problem was you actually had to go to alexandria to go to it.
do you actually want it online?
some of the first things that people do is they make book readers that allow you to search inside the books, and that's kind of fun.
and you can get at them remotely, if you happen to have a laptop.
and it turns out to not be very hard.
we actually went off to make a bookmobile.
and they actually come out kind of nice looking.
you can actually get really good-looking books for on the order of one penny per page, sort of the parts cost for doing this.
so the idea of being able to use this technology to end up with paper where i can handle sort of sounds a little retro, but i think it still has its place.
so we actually got some funding from the world bank to try it out.
what we found out of this is we didn't have the right books.
so the books were in the library.
we have one of these things now.
and we have a quick hack that we did to try to put one of our books on it, and it turns out that 200 dots per inch means that you can put scanned books on them that look really good.
so the idea of electronic books is starting to come about.
but how do you go about doing all this scanning?
and then we learned why you don't want to send books to india.
but do things that you love.
how do we go and do this, and how do we get it down so that it's a cost point that we could afford?
how do we get to 10 cents?
this is not a fax, this is -- the idea is to do a beautiful job as you're going through these libraries.
this is what it looks like at the university of toronto.
and what we've been able to do is get into libraries.
if we can get the 10 cents, all the rest of it flows.
the idea of taking on the whole ball of wax is not that big a deal.
if you give something to a charity or to the public, you get a pat on the back and a tax donation -- except on the net, where you can go broke.
and we get about two or three bands a day signing up.
but half of those were indian.
how can we have critical thinking without being able to quote and being able to compare what happened in the past?
if you go and search on something -- this is google.com, the different versions of it that we have, this is what it looks like when it was an alpha release, and this is what it looked like at stanford.
and we now have also another copy building up in amsterdam.
is all of this, as we go digital, is it going to be public or private?
the question is, is that the world that we really want to live in?
i would like to talk today about what i think is one of the greatest adventures human beings have embarked upon, which is the quest to understand the universe and our place in it.
a few years after that, in bangalore, i was finding it hard to fall asleep one night, and i picked up this book, thinking it would put me to sleep in 10 minutes.
and as it happened, i read it from midnight to five in the morning in one shot.
and today i would like to share with you some images, some stories of these trips.
and i first begin with a pie chart -- and i promise this is the only pie chart in the whole presentation -- but it sets up the state of our knowledge of the cosmos.
and the idea here is that they are looking for a sign of a dark matter particle hitting one of their detectors.
so they go deep inside mines to find a kind of environmental silence that will allow them to hear the ping of a dark matter particle hitting their detector.
and physicists came and started using it sometime in the 1980s.
there is another way to search for dark matter, which is indirectly.
and where in the world would you find such water?
it is the largest lake in the world.
and this is the scene that greeted me when i landed there.
the reason why they have to work in winter is because they don't have the money to work in summer and spring, which, if they did that, they would need ships and submersibles to do their work.
the toilets there are literally holes in the ground covered with a wooden shack.
and the more you understand that, the better you would understand what this dark energy that the universe is made of is all about.
the reason why you have to build these telescopes in places like the atacama desert is because of the high altitude desert.
i want to spend most of my time on this part of the world.
and here we are about to board our bus.
about a thousand people work here in summer, and about 200 in winter when it's completely dark for six months.
what i want you to imagine is this is two tons in weight.
and the weather can change as they're putting together this whole assembly.
now, in case the weather changes before the launch, they have to actually pack everything back up into their boxes and take it out back to mcmurdo station.
and if they have to pack it back, they have to put it into boxes and stamp on it so that it fits into the box again -- except, when they did it first, it would have been done in texas.
and i would like to share with you a launch.
and the thing i want you to look at here is the telescope on the right-hand side.
we all know the earth is in trouble.
we share in common the same pathogens.
it knows that you are there.
and this is the paradigm that we see throughout the universe.
most of you may not know that fungi were the first organisms to come to land.
the tallest plants on earth at that time were less than two feet.
we were involved with several experiments.
our team -- and we have a team of experts that go out -- we went out 20 times in the old-growth forest last year.
we found one sample to be able to get into culture.
10 or greater are considered to be very active.
or you can go to npr.org and listen to a live interview.
i then think that we can make the argument that we should save the old-growth forest as a matter of national defense.
our house was being destroyed by carpenter ants.
they gave it to the queen.
then you can harvest the kernels, and then you just need a few kernels.
and we came up with econol.
it will bring all of your family together.
flowers will arrive by the truckload.
have you had any work done?"
your life will have new meaning.
by now i know you're dying to know what it is and where you can get one.
this gift came to me about five months ago.
it looked more like this when it was all wrapped up -- not quite so pretty.
i have had the distinct pleasure of living inside two biospheres.
of course we all here in this room live in biosphere 1.
and the wonderful thing about that is that i get to compare biospheres.
so i am harvesting the wheat, in order to make the dough.
and then of course i have to milk the goats and feed the goats in order to make the cheese.
it took me four months in biosphere 2 to make a pizza.
we had our own half-acre farm that we had to grow everything.
and of course we had our human habitat, where we lived.
but of course none of that happened.
and it was time for us to go in and give it a go.
and we wanted to know this both for being able to go somewhere else in the universe -- if we were going to go to mars, for instance, would we take a biosphere with us, to live in it?
we also wanted to know so we can understand more about the earth that we all live in.
well, in 1991 it was finally time for us to go in and try out this baby.
so eight of us went in: four men and four women.
and this is the world that we lived in.
at that moment i became part of that biosphere.
i literally was eating the same carbon over and over again.
and we knew that we were losing co2.
we were growing plants like crazy.
we were trying to stop carbon from going into the atmosphere.
and that you literally do that.
i mean, the media was making it sound like were were dying.
but in fact he was the person who was most susceptible to the oxygen.
and one day he couldn't add up a line of figures.
in a sense it was terrifying.
and we found it in the concrete.
we had put too much carbon in the soil in the form of compost.
except that we knew what it was.
and nothing else emerged that really was as serious as that.
and the day i came out of biosphere 2, i was thrilled i was going to see all my family and my friends.
not only that, but i lost touch of where my food came from.
i had been growing all my own food.
i had no idea what was in my food, where it came from.
i didn't even recognize half the names in most of the food that i was eating.
people must have thought i was nuts.
and i slowly lost track of where i was in this big biosphere, in this big biosphere that we all live in.
and one of the things we did was try to figure out: how small can you make these biospheres, and what can you do with them?
but this is also what i saw.
i saw a company that had taken seawater and sand, and they were growing a kind of crop that will grow on pure salt water without having to treat it.
and it will produce a food crop.
in this case it was oilseed.
and the mangroves were providing wood and honey and leaves for the animals, so that they could produce milk and whatnot, like we had in the biosphere.
and i think often times people get lost in that.
and they like to keep everything beautifully raked.
and they keep all the leaves away.
and i threw away my rake.
and i let all of the leaves fall from the trees that i have on my property.
and so now all the birds come in.
this is what happens every spring.
it has also given us this, the ability to look at the world from the outside.
now we may not all have another biosphere that we can run to, and compare it to this biosphere.
but we can look at the world, and try to understand where we are in its context, and how we choose to interact with it.
and if you lose where you are in your biosphere, or are perhaps having a difficulty connecting with where you are in the biosphere, i would say to you, take a deep breath.
and as you breathe, think about what is in your breath.
maybe there is a little bit of oxygen from some algae on the beach not far from here.
there may be some carbon in your breath from the dinosaurs.
there could also be carbon that you are exhaling now that will be in the breath of your great-great-great-grandchildren.
i got my start in writing and research as a surgical trainee, as someone who was a long ways away from becoming any kind of an expert at anything.
so the natural question you ask then at that point is, how do i get good at what i'm trying to do?
and it became a question of, how do we all get good at what we're trying to do?
i had to think about how i sew and how i cut, but then also how i pick the right person to come to an operating room.
and then in the midst of all this came this new context for thinking about what it meant to be good.
there's not a country in the world that now is not asking whether we can afford what doctors do.
it was a time when medicine was cheap and very ineffective.
if you were in a hospital, he said, it was going to do you good only because it offered you some warmth, some food, shelter, and maybe the caring attention of a nurse.
doctors and medicine made no difference at all.
what they were trying to do was figure out whether you might have one of the diagnoses for which they could do something.
this was when the core structure of medicine was created -- what it meant to be good at what we did and how we wanted to build medicine to be.
it was at a time when what was known you could know, you could hold it all in your head, and you could do it all.
this was a life as a craftsman.
but we can make it possible for most.
there was a study where they looked at how many clinicians it took to take care of you if you came into a hospital, as it changed over time.
that is to say, it took basically the nursing time and then just a little bit of time for a doctor who more or less checked in on you once a day.
everyone just has a piece of the care.
this is just what medicine requires."
but i think we're ignoring certain facts that tell us something about what we can do.
because [if] to have the best results, you really needed the most expensive care in the country, or in the world, well then we really would be talking about rationing who we're going to cut off from medicare.
that would be really our only choice.
that is to say, they found ways to get all of the different pieces, all of the different components, to come together into a whole.
there's a famous thought experiment that touches exactly on this that said, what if you built a car from the very best car parts?
and you put it all together and what do you get?
a very expensive pile of junk that does not go anywhere.
and that is what medicine can feel like sometimes.
skill number one is the ability to recognize success and the ability to recognize failure.
and he wanted to get the data.
which brings us to skill number two a system has.
i got interested in this when the world health organization came to my team asking if we could help with a project to reduce deaths in surgery.
and we had items like making sure everyone in the room had introduced themselves by name at the start of the day, because you get half a dozen people or more who are sometimes coming together as a team for the very first time that day that you're coming in.
this was bigger than a drug.
i asked him, what was it like to actually herd a thousand cattle across hundreds of miles?
and it seemed like time that we become that way ourselves.
and most of those losses are because of things we know.
and here we see a picture on top of a hill in central valley last december.
and so this opens up the whole idea of looking at colony health.
and you can do that one year in a row, you may be able to do it two years in a row.
you know, they pick up their hives; they move their families once or twice in a year.
they all have their breakfast and complain about everyone right there.
and there are flowers that are self-infertile.
and in fact, there is now a red list of pollinators that we're worried have disappeared, and on top of that list are a lot of these kleptoparasites, but also these bumblebees.
and i think that there is an easy cure for ndd.
and i think we have lost our connection, and this is a wonderful way of reconnecting to our environment.
and i encourage you to look at that.
get a beehive and grow a meadow, and watch that life come back into your life.
and i hope that you experience it and i hope you tell me about it one day.
so thank you very much for being here.
i found this observation test about the story of the ark.
some of them are very easy.
so now we have god that is going to submerge earth permanently or at least for a very long period, and no one is taking care of plants.
noah needed to take two of every kind of bird, of every kind of animal, of every kind of creature that moves, but no mention about plants.
we have the animals that are able to live and to sense, and on the top of the pyramid, there is the man.
this is not the common man.
you know very well about professors.
this is a very fast movement.
no one can say that the plants were able to eat an animal, because it was against the order of nature.
but plants are also able to show a lot of movement.
some of them are much more sophisticated.
look at this young bean that is moving to catch the light every time.
they are also able to play -- they are really playing.
they are training themselves, as many young animals do, to the adult life where they will be called to track the sun all the day.
but they are also able to sleep.
now, there is a big problem behind all this behavior that we have seen.
how is it possible to do this without a brain?
he wrote some very interesting letters to one of his friends who was j.d.
so you can recognize this kind of movement, the same movement that worms, snakes and every animal that are moving on the ground without legs is able to display.
and it's not an easy movement because, to have this kind of movement, you need to move different regions of the root and to synchronize these different regions without having a brain.
now we know that a root apex has just a few hundred cells that show this kind of feature, but we know how big the root apparatus of a small plant, like a plant of rye.
they work in the same way.
and why are they so similar?
they work in the same way.
until now, the man was inspired just by man or the animals in producing a robot.
but why have we not any plantoid?
but if you want to explore soils, or if you want to colonize new territory, to best thing that you can do is to be inspired by plants that are masters in doing this.
it's much more easy to work with plants than with animals.
but it can also sound like this.
and i would have lost my face.
and i also entered the world championship, and i won there in 2004.
so i quit my day job as a nurse.
i started improv everywhere about 10 years ago when i moved to new york city with an interest in acting and comedy.
and this woman is the star of the video.
and this is the first stop along the line.
these are two danish guys who come out and sit down next to the hidden camera.
now in the meantime, i have six friends who are waiting at the next six consecutive stops in their underwear as well.
and she decides to be a little bit more aware of her surroundings.
and watch her make eye contact with them right about now.
and i love that moment in this video, because before it became a shared experience, it was something that was maybe a little bit scary, or something that was at least confusing to her.
and then once it became a shared experience, it was funny and something that she could laugh at.
so the train is now pulling into the third stop along the 6 line.
this goes on for another four stops.
and also in 50 other cities around the world, people participated.
and there was a girl in one of the windows and she was dancing.
so it seemed like maybe she had been dared to do this.
and then we had dance solos where only one person would dance and everybody would point to them.
we had people jumping up and down, people dropping to the ground.
and because it was in union square park, right by a subway station, there were hundreds of people by the end who stopped and looked up and watched what we were doing.
so that particular event was inspired by a moment that i happened to stumble upon.
the next project i want to show was given to me in an email from a stranger.
we had about 80 people show up to participate, entering one-by-one.
now you can see the regular employees by the ones that have the yellow tags on their shirt.
a lot of them made jokes about trying to get us to go to the back to get heavy television sets for customers.
you can see them in this footage.
stop where there are these two giant escalators.
so i decided to try and stage something that could make it as happy as possible for one morning.
and that was done also without permission, although no one seemed to care.
as long as it's fun and it seems like it's going to be a funny idea and it seems like the people who witness it will also have a fun time, then that's enough for us.
have they put up the wrong slide?"
this is the ancestor of cattle.
now why am i talking about cows?
because i want to say that much the same thing is true of religions.
because what i've been doing for the last four years, really since the first time you saw me -- some of you saw me at ted when i was talking about religion, and in the last four years i've been working just about non-stop on this topic.
you don't do book talks at ted, but i'm going to have just one slide about my book, because there is one message in it which i think this group really needs to hear.
and i would be very interested to get your responses to this.
and as long as you teach them that, you can teach them anything else you like.
as long as you inform your children about other religions, then you may -- and as early as you like and whatever you like -- teach them whatever creed you want them to learn.
but also let them know about other religions.
now why do i say that?
this is the way we treat people as responsible adults.
you may teach them whatever creed you think is most important, but i say you have a responsibility to let them be informed about all the other creeds in the world, too.
this picture, which i pulled off the web -- the fellow on the left is really an important part of this picture.
they depend on us for their survival.
think of what this got them.
the only cost in most flocks is a loss of free mating.
but it was a very clever move.
and why was the ant doing it?
and i think some people may have misunderstood.
the lesson we learn from this is you don't have to have a mind to be a beneficiary.
and here i want to remind you of a wonderful point that paul maccready made at ted three years ago.
that is what we have done on this planet.
and he gave me a paper that he had written on this.
there was a passage in it which he did not present here and i think it is so good i'm going to read it to you.
and how can we do that?
does that ever happen to us?
the word of god is the seed and the sower of the seed is christ."
and you heard just now what the goal is.
there are lots of people out there who don't have purpose in their life, and bringing purpose to their life is a wonderful goal.
every time you read it or say it, you make another copy in your brain.
every time you read it or say it, you make another copy in your brain.
and now we come to my problem.
but i wish it were better.
i have some problems with the book.
i wish he could do this with a revision, a mark 2 version of his book.
you could stop reading this book because life would have no purpose or meaning or significance.
there would be no right or wrong and no hope beyond your brief years on earth."
yes, there is meaning and a reason for right or wrong.
we don't need a belief in god to be good or to have meaning in us.
but that is just a difference of opinion.
i'm afraid that a lot of people take that sentiment to mean that we don't have to do the sorts of things that al gore is trying so hard to get us to do.
now maybe we want to treat it as metaphorical.
there might be some way of treating that as true.
and what i find deeply troubling in this book is that he seems to be arguing that if you want to be moral, if you want to have meaning in your life, you have to be an intelligent designer -- you have to deny the theory of evolution by natural selection.
whose truth are we going to listen to?
baptize them in the name of the father, the son and the holy spirit, and teach them to do everything i've told you.'"
the bible says jesus is the only one who can save the world.
now here we've seen many wonderful maps of the world in the last day or so.
it seems to me that that's a very problematic ship to get on for the future.
and you also know many religious people who hide behind their sanctity instead of doing good works.
thanks very much for your attention.
after a crisis, how can we tell if water is safe to drink?
there was no way to predict how far it would spread through water supplies and how bad the situation would get.
and not knowing where help was needed always ensured that help was in short supply in the areas that needed it most.
right now, if you want to test water in the field, you need a trained technician, expensive equipment like this, and you have to wait about a day for chemical reactions to take place and provide results.
we call it the water canary.
sound health in 8 steps
in fact, all of you as you sit here right now are vibrating.
your ears can hear 10 octaves.
your ears are always on -- you have no ear lids.
they work even when you sleep.
and yet it's a skill that none of us are taught.
for example, have you ever considered that there are listening positions, places you can listen from?
the trouble with listening is that so much of what we hear is noise, surrounding us all the time.
it looks a bit like this.
so, we're inviting into our lives the voices of people who are not present with us.
i do hope that some of you at least can hear the difference between those two.
there is a cost of compression.
it makes you tired and irritable to have to make up all of that data.
if you're going to use headphones, buy the best ones you can afford because quality means you don't have to have it so loud.
protect your ears in that way.
sound healing is a wonderful modality.
i hope that that after this talk you'll be doing that.
the voice is the instrument we all play, and yet how many of us are trained in using our voice?
you can do this in groups as well.
and let's start to speak up when people are assailing us with the noise that i played you early on.
so i'm going to leave you with seven things you can do right now to improve your health with sound.
my vision is of a world that sounds beautiful and if we all start doing these things, we will take a very big step in that direction.
i want to ask you all to consider for a second the very simple fact that, by far, most of what we know about the universe comes to us from light.
we can stand on the earth and look up at the night sky and see stars with our bare eyes.
now black holes are dark against a dark sky.
we might one day see a shadow a black hole can cast on a very bright background, but we haven't yet.
now even light will be bent by those paths.
and even light could not escape this current.
light would be dragged down the hole as everything else would be, and all that would be left would be a shadow.
he did not believe they existed in nature.
he thought nature would protect us from their formation.
and you would realize you could put the earth in a happy orbit even 30 km outside of this crushed black hole.
it might spill off into the hudson a little bit before it destroyed the earth.
we're talking about an object that you could crush down to half the square area of manhattan.
it cannot hide behind the black hole.
the light from the earth, some of it falls in, but some of it gets lensed around and brought back to us.
and if we were to fall towards this black hole, we would see all of that light lensed around it, and we could even start to cross into that shadow and really not notice that anything dramatic had happened.
it would be bad if we tried to fire our rockets and get out of there because we couldn't, anymore than light can escape.
but even though the black hole is dark from the outside, it's not dark on the inside, because all of the light from the galaxy can fall in behind us.
it would be like a near-death experience where you see the light at the end of the tunnel, but it's a total death experience.
and there's no way of telling anybody about the light at the end of the tunnel.
it took almost 30 years for anyone in the world to crack this problem.
this was one of the groups.
they're literally the sounds of space ringing, and they will travel out from these black holes at the speed of light as they ring down and coalesce to one spinning, quiet black hole at the end of the day.
you would literally hear the sound.
but i'd like to play for you the sound that we predict.
imagine a lighter black hole falling into a very heavy black hole.
at home it sounds kind of anticlimactic.
this is another sound from my group.
want to get away from the sound.
both black holes are getting closer together.
but the sound is too quiet for any of us to ever hear.
we want to be inside the universe because there's no such thing as standing outside the universe.
fourteen billion years pass and this song is still ringing all around us.
that song has been ringing through space for all that time.
if it was the big bang we were going to pick up, it would sound like this.
and if we pick it up, it will be music to our ears because it will be the quiet echo of that moment of our creation, of our observable universe.
are there other creatures in the multiverse, wondering about us and wondering about their own origins?
i waited for the wind to come up and held up a canvas, and that produced art.
i multiplied them by the number of twigs per branch and the number of branches per tree and then divided that by the number of minutes per year.
and so i was able to calculate how far a single tree moved in a single year.
and i began to think about ways that we might consider this lesson of trees, to consider other entities that are also static and stuck, but which cry for change and dynamicism, and one of those entities is our prisons.
and our prison system itself is stuck.
i decided to ask whether the lesson i had learned from trees as artists could be applied to a static institution such as our prisons, and i think the answer is yes.
a human child is born, and for quite a long time is a consumer.
each one has got two games.
no human heart is denied of that empathy.
because it is there in everybody.
i will come to it later.
it has got to be you.
you cannot be a part of wholeness and still be whole.
i have no more reason to blame myself.
everything is going to be limitless.
and there is no way of your being not limitless too.
you express yourself because you have compassion.
you have to act it out.
culture is a form of resistance.
i envy sometimes the artists of the west for their freedom of expression.
for the fact that they can distance themselves from the question of politics.
our people depend on our artists, and culture is beyond communication.
the first one that you see in front of you is actually when i first returned to iran after being separated for a good 12 years.
i came mainly to be reunited with my family and to reconnect in a way that i found my place in the society.
this changed slowly as i found my voice and i discovered things that i didn't know i would discover.
and i fell into a life in exile.
this book is banned, and she spent five years in prison.
i made this film because i felt it's important for it to speak to the westerners about our history as a country.
this film also speaks to the iranian people in asking them to return to their history and look at themselves before they were so islamicized -- in the way we looked, in the way we played music, in the way we had intellectual life.
and most of all, in the way that we fought for democracy.
how to move you with your emotions, but also make your mind work.
it brought a lot of attention to all those iranians who stand for basic human rights and struggle for democracy.
they have broken every rule in the smallest and the biggest way.
i stand here to say that iranian women have found a new voice, and their voice is giving me my voice.
and so they asked me if i would come and see rosalie, the old lady.
i went in to see her.
but he has huge teeth on one side of his mouth.
they come to a certain point and then stop.
i see a lot of children.
they are walking up and down stairs.
and she has a sense of humor.
she knew it was a hallucination.
she had no control over them.
she said she didn't recognize any of the people or places in the hallucinations.
she wondered if she was going mad or losing her mind.
there is nothing wrong with your brain.
there is nothing wrong with your mind.
the first thing he said was he saw a handkerchief in midair.
and he knew it was a hallucination.
and you start to see things.
on one occasion, she said she saw a man in a striped shirt in a restaurant.
a lot of them had to do with a car.
and if they do mention them to their own doctors they may be misdiagnosed.
around 1970, it was found that there were not only parts of the brain, but particular cells.
i had to bring it in.
i think i just want to recapitulate and say this is common.
think of the number of blind people.
there must be hundreds of thousands of blind people who have these hallucinations, but are too scared to mention them.
have you yourself experienced any of the syndromes you write about?
thank you so much for sharing.
the khan academy is most known for its collection of videos, so before i go any further, let me show you a little bit of a montage.
if this does not blow your mind, then you have no emotion.
but what we're going to talk about in this is how we're going to the next level.
but before i do that, i want to talk a little bit about really just how i got started.
they can just watch those videos.
they can watch it at their own time, at their own pace.
and these are just a few.
and we get a lot of feedback all along those lines.
but then, as the viewership kept growing and kept growing, i started getting letters from people, and it was starting to become clear that it was actually more than just a nice-to-have.
it was very strange for me to do something of social value.
and then a few other things started to dawn on me.
but then i started getting letters from teachers.
how do we take what those teachers are doing to their natural conclusion?
the ones i started were much more primitive.
and then you go build on that in the next concept.
do it as long as necessary until you have mastery.
this is just another one of the modules.
we have about 90 of these right now.
but the general idea is that they all fit into this knowledge map.
the leftmost question is the first question that the student attempted.
it's almost like you can see them learning over those last 10 problems.
maybe we should put them in different classes."
but when you let every student work at their own pace -- and we see it over and over and over again -- you see students who took a little bit [of] extra time on one concept or the other, but once they get through that concept, they just race ahead.
and so the same kids that you thought were slow six weeks ago, you now would think are gifted.
and it makes you really wonder how much all of the labels maybe a lot of us have benefited from were really just due to a coincidence of time.
maybe five percent of their time is actually sitting next to students and actually working with them.
imagine what it does to a street kid in calcutta who has to help his family during the day, and that's the reason why he or she can't go to school.
now they can spend two hours a day and remediate, or get up to speed and not feel embarrassed about what they do or don't know.
now imagine what happens where -- we talked about the peers teaching each other inside of a classroom.
but this is all one system.
we have to think about it."
and me and the rest of the team were like, "they're never going to want to do this."
i think what they're excited about is they can now follow these kids.
do you think a lot of classes next school year should try this thing out?
i think you just got a glimpse of the future of education.
so i want to take you on a trip to an alien world.
i study it because i think understanding it is critical to understanding life in the ocean where most bioluminescence occurs.
i needed some way to share the experience directly.
this is the first time it has ever been recorded.
which means that really is what you would see if you took a dive in a submersible.
the flash is like a scream for help.
but it was worth it, because we caught it in a special capture device, brought it up into the lab on the ship, and then everything on this fish lights up.
i just barely got the lights out in time for you to be able to see those gobs of light hitting the transect screen and then just glowing.
so there's a lot of animals in the open ocean -- most of them that make light.
but when you get down to the bottom of the ocean, that's where things get really strange.
the other reason is this amazing bush glows.
and you see things like this.
this looks like something out of a dr.
and it actually ends up looking like a galaxy.
and there are brittle stars that produce bands of light that dance along their arms.
and it anchors itself in the sand by blowing up a balloon on the end of its stock.
so it can actually hold itself in very strong currents, as you see here.
but we have no idea why it does that.
this is also a sea pen.
and like the one you just saw, it can produce these as bands of light.
so what do you think happens if you squeeze it in the middle?
but if it had been following the odor plume, it would have come in from the other direction.
and it does actually seem to be trying to eat the electronic jellyfish.
we need more eyes on the process.
but if you do take the plunge, please remember to turn out the lights.
there is going to be no turning back.
the revolution is going to continue for at least several more decades.
keep your eyes lifted and your head turning.
the search for knowledge is in our genes.
it will be better for all if they prepare before entering office rather than learning on the job.
the longer you wait to become at least semi-literate the harder the language of mathematics will be to master, just as again in any verbal language, but it can be done at any age.
ideas emerge when a part of the real or imagined world is studied for its own sake.
if that step proves too difficult for the person or team that made the discovery, a mathematician can then be added by them as a collaborator.
judge opportunity by how few other students and researchers are on hand.
you may have heard the military dictum for the gathering of armies: march to the sound of the guns.
the world needs this kind of expertise, and it rewards the kind of people willing to acquire it.
the search is not for the solution of the problem, but for problems themselves worth solving.
you have chosen a calling that will come in steps to give you satisfaction, at its conclusion, of a life well lived.
and i thank you for having me here tonight.
so what we can do is actually tell you about the molecules, but we don't really have a direct way of showing you the molecules.
one way around this is to draw pictures.
and this idea is actually nothing new.
this was work from a number of years ago.
all this field of view is a single strand of dna.
so we're not going to be able to do that today?
this is the way a living cell looks down a light microscope.
so this is a single chromosome.
it's turning green here because it feels that everything is just right.
the problem is we can't show it to you any other way.
but i think we can see the very beginnings of a new story beginning to emerge.
the form of wealth in those days was enough food to stay alive.
did the people who ate that mastodon meat owe something to the hunters and their families?
and it was the administers of these empires who began hiring people to keep track of the wheat and sheep and wine that was owed and the taxes that was owed on them by making marks; marks on clay in that time.
so she went out and looked at what data she could find.
and she said that people are only prisoners if they consider themselves to be.
and yet we see very little talk about how the next form may be emerging.
now none of these companies are doing this out of altruism; they're doing it because they're learning that a certain kind of sharing is in their self-interest.
and i don't have enough time to talk about all of them, but think about self-interest.
i think we need to begin developing maps of this territory so that we can talk about it across disciplines.
and i am not saying that understanding cooperation is going to cause us to be better people -- and sometimes people cooperate to do bad things -- but i will remind you that a few hundred years ago, people saw their loved ones die from diseases they thought were caused by sin or foreigners or evil spirits.
what forms of suffering could be alleviated, what forms of wealth could be created if we knew a little bit more about cooperation?
and we really are seeing this in very different terms from the kind of mapping and direction site that one is used to.
so this one was taken around five.
and i'm not going to show you some of the wonderful historic imagery in here, but there are some with horses and carriages and so on as well.
what i wanted to show you was these points of interest over here on top of the image because what that gives you a sense of is the way, if you're actually on the spot, you can think about this -- this is taking a step in addition to augmented reality.
one of them is to take that real ...
all right, let me just take a moment and thank the team.
i would like to kind of zoom in on the moon.
but today i've got a personal story to share with you.
and this picture is taken in vietnam.
i think it's the only precedent in which money has ever been stopped from being used.
and we know money is the root of all evil, but it didn't actually stop evil from happening in cambodia, in fact.
and in fact they were forced to work the fields.
and it was at that time that my mother got word from the commune chief that the vietnamese were actually asking for their citizens to go back to vietnam.
and at about this time actually my father got very sick.
but for us it meant freedom.
five years ago my mother and i went back to chau doc.
and she was able to return to a place that for her meant freedom, but also fear, because we had just come out of cambodia.
and if people feel used, worthless and ashamed, because something horrible has happened to them, then they retreat, and they fall into social isolation, and they do not dare to tell this evil to other people or to their loved ones, because they do not want to burden them.
so the key here is empathy.
somebody has to be a witness to what has happened to you.
everybody must be able to know what he or she has experienced is true, and this only goes with another person.
and i started thinking about a counseling program.
and one evening, i was sitting next to a very nice gentleman in kabul, and he asked what i thought would be good in afghanistan.
and they are working with me up to today.
we wanted to know if what is being done is effective.
and all the symptoms stayed the same or even got worse.
so this makes us very happy, because now we also have some evidence that this is working.
and doctors usually have three to six minutes for the patients, but now this will change.
and i would like to share one short vignette.
and now you are helping me to regain some confidence in the future."
so i believe this kept me running.
i thank you for your attention.
here he shares his amazing story and unveils a ted prize wish that could have a big impact in the us and beyond.
from my teachers, my family and my community, i had all the necessary support to become a musician.
from the very first rehearsal, i saw the bright future ahead.
i had received a donation of 50 music stands to be used by 100 boys in that rehearsal.
you share with us and make music.
it makes him a better student at school because it inspires in him a sense of responsibility, perseverance and punctuality that will greatly help him at school.
the child becomes a role model for both his parents, and this is very important for a poor child.
once the child discovers he is important to his family, he begins to seek new ways of improving himself and hopes better for himself and his community.
the idea is that the families join with pride and joy in the activities of the orchestras and the choirs that their children belong to.
no longer putting society at the service of art, and much less at the services of monopolies of the elite, but instead art at the service of society, at the service of the weakest, at the service of the children, at the service of the sick, at the service of the vulnerable, and at the service of all those who cry for vindication through the spirit of their human condition and the raising up of their dignity.
then the second part will really just be examples of new technologies -- new media falling very much into that mold.
and then the last one will be some examples i've been able to collect, which i think illustrate this at least as best i can, in the world of entertainment.
what a terrible image you get when you look at still pictures on tv."
how did people get into this mess?
and they can be treated very easily; there are actually ways of getting rid of them, there are actually ways of just making absolutely beautiful pictures.
and so when you see on the market these systems that have just a few light emitting diodes on the side and are very low resolution, it's nice that they exist because it still is better than nothing.
what we did stumble across was something ...
so we found that that actually was a feature in the sense you could build a pressure-sensitive display.
i want to stop it for a second because the movie is very badly made.
and the particular display was built about six years ago, and when we moved from one room to another room, a rather large person sat on it and it got destroyed.
so all we have is this record.
we are so used to doing monologues.
what i'll show you very quickly is a new kind of book where it is mixed now with ... all sorts of things live in there, but you have to keep a few things in mind.
one is that this book knows about itself.
and the other is where you want to explain the same thing in different ways.
you try and think of a different way of saying the same thing, or if you know the particular student and that student's cognitive style, then you might say it in a way that you think would have a good impedance match with that student.
and this is a book on how to repair a transmission.
i'm at the third and last part of this, which i said i would make an attempt to at least give you some examples that may be more directly related to the world of entertainment.
and the child was just zipping right through it, showing them all sorts of things until they asked him how to do something which he couldn't explain and so he flipped through the manual, found the explanation and typed the command and got it to do what they asked.
and they all got up and they all went downstairs and the child was still there.
and it really meant something to the child.
the key to the future of computers in education is right there, and it is: when does it mean something to a child?
there is a myth, and it truly is a myth: we believe -- and i'm sure a lot of you believe in this room -- that it is harder to read and write than it is to learn how to speak.
and yet you've got to go to school to learn how to read, and you have to sit in a classroom and somebody has to teach you.
what the truth is is that speaking has great value to a child; the child can get a great deal by talking to you.
there is no reason for a child to read and write except blind faith, and that it's going to help you.
and again, i could talk for three hours about this subject.
i will come to my last example and then quit.
and the reason it remains a favorite project is that we were asked to do a teleconferencing system where you had the following situation: you had five people at five different sites -- they were known people -- and you had to have these people in teleconference, such that each one was utterly convinced that the other four were physically present.
so if i wanted to call my friend peter sprague on the phone, my secretary would get his head out and bring it and set it on the desk, and that would be the tv used for the occasion.
and i'll show you one more slide, where this is actually made from something called a solid photograph and is the screen.
and then if that person interrupts, then those two heads may turn.
because that moment when you answer the phone is a cognitive test every time that you do it.
is it a hearing problem or is it a physicality problem?
but those subtle changes in your voice over a long period of time are hard for you or your spouse to notice until it becomes so extreme and your voice has become so quiet.
wow, what a great day that will be once we're allowed to actually do those kinds of things.
and it's the whole field that we've been trying to work on for the last 10 years at intel.
we go live with them in the winter because what they do in the winter, and their access to healthcare, and how much they socialize, is very different than in the summer.
if they have a family member who is a key part of their care network, we fly and study them as well.
it was right around new years.
and that switchover, when we had the larger number of older people on the planet, for the first time than younger people.
and 10 years ago it seemed like i had a lot of time to convince intel to work on this.
she was born one second after midnight in 1946.
he saw it written down somewhere.
the first word that comes up is "doctor."
the second that comes up is "hospital."
and the problem with this is the way we conceive healthcare.
and now we want to do a double-double of the age wave coming through?
that's what we need to do for our personal health model.
raise your hand if you had a serious fall in your household, or any of your loved ones, your parents or so forth.
this is what was happening to mimi; the family was worried about it, moved her out of her own home into an assisted living facility.
she was never going to be able to move back into the assisted living.
let me give you a quick example of work that we're doing to try to do exactly that.
this person on the left is living in their own home.
this person on the right is actually living in an assisted living facility.
i know this because look at how punctuated meal time is when they are no longer in their particular rooms here.
no matter who pays for it, we better start doing care in a fundamentally different way and treating the home and the patient and the family member and the caregivers as part of these coordinated care teams and using disruptive technologies that are already here to do care in some pretty fundamental different ways.
we should do it economically, we should do it morally, and we should do it for quality of life.
so i took the food supply of every single country and i compared it to what was actually likely to be being consumed in each country.
a country like america has four times the amount of food that it needs.
this is what most of us think of when we think of food waste, what ends up in the garbage, what ends up in supermarket bins, what ends up in restaurant bins.
when you start going up the supply chain, you find where the real food waste is happening on a gargantuan scale.
can i have a show of hands if you have a loaf of sliced bread in your house?
we take food off the market shelves that hungry people depend on.
go one step up, and you get to farmers, who throw away sometimes a third or even more of their harvest because of cosmetic standards.
if we do that to fruit and vegetables, you bet we can do it to animals too.
how have i insulted my host?"
the one on the left was kept in a fridge for 10 days.
the one on the right i treated like cut flowers.
i answered that question when i was 15.
at the same time we throw away millions of tons of food waste which we could and should be feeding them.
if we did that, and fed it to pigs, we would save that amount of carbon.
we knew that during the war.
feeding the 5,000 is an event i first organized in 2009.
it's a way of organizations coming together to celebrate food, to say the best thing to do with food is to eat and enjoy it, and to stop wasting it.
when i was growing up in montana, i had two dreams.
i was very fortunate early in my career.
i was fortunate in finding things.
then i just pick things up.
and i wander about the hills, and i have found a few things.
and it happened to be at a time when people were just starting to begin to realize that dinosaurs weren't the big, stupid, green reptiles that people had thought for so many years.
people were starting to get an idea that dinosaurs were special.
i have gone on to find more things and discover that dinosaurs really were very social.
michael crichton really was one of the first people to talk about bringing dinosaurs back to life.
well we tried and tried and we couldn't really get anything else out of it.
and we did find a lot of stuff.
we found a lot of tyrannosaurs, but we found one special tyrannosaur, and we called it b-rex.
but this one died at the age of 16.
and so here was the first soft tissue from a dinosaur.
but we thought maybe -- well, we thought maybe that the material was breaking down after it was coming out of the ground.
and so we built a laboratory in the back of an 18-wheeler trailer, and actually took the laboratory to the field where we could get better samples.
so we have a number of ways that we actually can fix the chicken.
that's where you take a gene out of one animal and stick it in another one.
and they obviously make a lot of money off of them.
and so there are a number of atavisms that can happen.
we know we can use that.
and the same goes for the tails.
we want to stop that tail from resorbing.
we need a plan b
we didn't all know each other, but we all kind of trusted each other, and that basic feeling of trust permeated the whole network, and there was a real sense that we could depend on each other to do things.
so just to give you an idea of the level of trust in this community, let me tell you what it was like to register a domain name in the early days.
so i could have anything i wanted other than bbn.com and symbolics.com.
my rough calculation is it would be about 25 miles thick.
and so, there are many of those things that start to happen.
so of course, the fastest way to get a message anywhere was to send it to this guy, who would send it back in time and get it there super early, so every message in the internet started getting switched through this one node, and of course that clogged everything up.
so all of our systems, more and more, are starting to use the same technology and starting to depend on this technology.
but so what we need is a plan b.
there is no plan b right now.
but people won't decide to do it until they recognize the need for it, and that's the problem that we have right now.
so there's been plenty of people, plenty of us have been quietly arguing that we should have this independent system for years, but it's very hard to get people focused on plan b when plan a seems to be working so well.
it could definitely be done by people in this room.
i am going to be talking about secrets.
obviously the best way to divulge a secret is to tell someone to not say anything about it.
and when you use these things you don't have to go like that.
people could live there one day.
would you mind taking the insects?
and of course there will be advertisements.
can you call me in a little while?"
these are more people working for this group.
that seems a little silly to me.
so beautiful that i will even give up a laugh to explain my love of this particular planet, and the day saturday, named after it, wonderfully.
he was also famous for having no body.
there is a dodecahedron which i had to do in my room last night.
which is not to be confused with the five sacred salads.
this would be a normal wave pattern.
and judging from this, it looks a little like a cheeseburger.
i am not suggesting at all that my vietnamese brothers and sisters could maybe use a little art class here and there.
and the reason i just bring this up because it is a law that doesn't really work.
every top adds up to 37.
i knew those two were related.
am i the only one that sees this?
which is .005 different from the number of days in a year.
many things have been said about this.
it so happens that these weapons are dangerous.
but today both countries say the best defense is to attack.
because no nation knows for sure whether its neighbor is about to attack.
i tried to find one that didn't have a whole lot of words.
not all of them have happy endings.
so how did i get started cartooning?
so you have to make a living cartooning.
actually, i fell in love with the ocean when i was a little boy, when i was about eight or nine.
this is some of my early work.
and this is how we've seen the ocean since the beginning of time.
so from that day on, i was an ordinary kid walking around on dry land, but my head was down there, underwater.
up until that day, these were the animals that were most common in my life.
i love to draw the deep sea fish, because they are so ugly, but beautiful in their own way.
could you imagine being born with a tool for a nose?
he never seems to settle on any particular girl.
sometimes making a story is as easy as putting two characters in a room and seeing what happens.
or, sometimes i take them to places that people have never heard of because they're underwater.
he goes down and he meets this famous anglerfish.
the third storyline i did about a year and a half ago was probably my most difficult.
i had to kill my main character, who is a shark.
so i got a lot of reader feedback on that one.
you can kind of do anything.
and you take the piece out into the daylight.
and you see you have a beautiful piece of white alabaster.
and you hear other people doing the same thing.
so you get this sense of urgency, like you need to find as much stuff as possible as soon as possible.
and they turn up the lights.
this is actually a story of my own backyard.
he came back to california and named his dog after that river of enchantment.
it was only when alex passed away that i realized that the eyelids, in some sense, were my own, and having done so much to allow me to learn to see, alex in his own way was saying goodbye.
and those who really own it are the generations as yet unborn.
and if any of you would like to join us on this great adventure, please come and see me later today.
by any chance, did anyone happen to bring with them this morning a calculator?
would the four of you with calculators please bring out your calculators, then join me up on stage.
do all of you get 1,034?
what i'm going to try and do then -- i notice that took some of you a little bit of time to get your answer.
there is something called the square of a number, which most of you know is taking a number and multiplying it by itself.
let me try to take this one step further.
let me try to take this one step further.
now you can all take your time on this; i will not beat you to the answer on this one, but i will try to get the answer right.
in the meanwhile, let me conclude the first part of my show by doing something a little trickier.
would you each enter that on your calculator?
is there any possible way that i could know what seven digit numbers you have?
what i'd like each of you to do is to call out for me any six of your seven digits, any six of them, in any order you'd like.
by any chance, does anybody here happen to know the day of the week that they were born on?
if you think you know your birth day, raise your hand.
we can do it that way.
i brought with me a book of calendars.
ok, well stand up for me just for a second, so i can see where you are.
let me explain what that is.
if you want to talk to me about adhd afterwards, you can talk to me then.
get them out of schools, and keep them out of schools.
and if you look at it over here, the main thing i wrote on my thumb was the future.
nor, i suspect, do many other people who are talking about what the future will bring.
certainly, all of us can imagine these cool new things that are going to be there.
change is happening, and the change that is happening is not one that is in software.
oh -- the other thing that i think i'd like to talk about is right over here.
i would dearly love to talk about things that have one side.
that was a month of my life.
i realize that this picture was taken at a friend's living room.
bob's passing this past summer has been a loss to all of us.
i feel that the best way i can help out anything is to help out very, very locally.
put your money where you mouth is."
not just showing up every now and then.
i strongly suggest that this is a good thing for each of you to do.
not just show up to class every now and then.
oh, before i even turn that on, one of the things that we did about three weeks ago in my class -- this is through the lens, and one of the things we used a lens for was to measure the speed of light.
we were off by 25 percent.
i'm all set to do it, but then it turns out that to set up here, you have like 10 minutes to set up!
those of you who are physicists, i hear you rolling your eyes, but bear with me.
to measure the wavelength, all i need to do is measure the distance from here -- one full wave -- over to here.
all of which comes to what i wanted to say.
go back to this picture of me a million years ago.
this cop comes after me with a rifle.
then i remember what my english teacher in high school said.
it is the voice of life, which calls us to come and learn."
did you know that we americans have about three times the amount of space we did 50 years ago?
so how can you live little?
we need to think before we buy.
by all means, we should buy and own some great stuff.
so we want things that nest, we want things that stack, and we want it digitized.
my bed just pops out of the wall with two fingers.
so when you go home and you walk through your front door, take a second and ask yourselves, "could i do with a little life editing?
would that give me a little more freedom?
plenty of play in childhood makes for happy, smart adults -- and keeping it up can make us smarter at any age.
and i think this is a typical picture of what it was like in a courtyard then.
i think we may have lost something in our culture.
they are beginning to do something that neither would have done without the play signals.
now how did i get involved in this?
and it was many years in taking play histories of individuals before i really began to recognize that i didn't really have a full understanding of it.
and i don't think any of us has a full understanding of it, by any means.
but there are ways of looking at it that i think can give you -- give us all a taxonomy, a way of thinking about it.
and i'd like you to think that every bit of more complex play builds on this base for us humans.
and you may feel like this character, who is also just doing it for its own sake.
he taught mechanics in a high school in long beach, and found that his students were no longer able to solve problems.
now one of the things about play is that it is born by curiosity and exploration.
but it has to be safe exploration.
but take a look at the face and the body language of everybody in this fuzzy picture, and you can get a sense that they're all at play.
so what does play do for the brain?
and this is one of the ways you can study play -- is to get a 256-lead electroencephalogram.
the reason i put this here is also to queue up my thoughts about objectifying what play does.
you know, you can tell -- and i think when we're getting into collective play, its really important for groups to gain a sense of safety through their own sharing of play signals.
you may not know this word, but it should be your biological first name and last name.
and this gives us a leg up on adaptability.
your own personal play history is unique, and often is not something we think about particularly.
found that when he looked at a playground out of a window into which he had been confined, he felt something different.
and so he followed up on it.
now there's another play history that i think is a work in progress.
and although i think he certainly had the capacity for play -- because i do know something about that -- he wasn't as empowered, i think, as he now is by paying attention to what is his own passion and his own inner drive, which i think has its basis in all of us in our play history.
and begin to build to build from the emotion of that into how that connects with your life now.
most of us work with groups, and i put this up because the d.school, the design school at stanford, thanks to david kelley and a lot of others who have been visionary about its establishment, has allowed a group of us to get together and create a course called "from play to innovation."
and one of their projects was to see what makes meetings boring, and to try and do something about it.
take the meeting off, and have peace of mind that you can come back to me.
because when you need it again, the meeting is literally hanging in your closet.
because when you put it on, you immediately get everything you need to have a fun and productive and useful meeting.
so there's a disconnect between preparation for the future -- which is what most people are comfortable in thinking about play as -- and thinking of it as a separate biological entity.
and if you look at sleep and dreams biologically, animals sleep and dream, and they rehearse and they do some other things that help memory and that are a very important part of sleep and dreams.
and the fact that the polar bear and husky or magpie and a bear or you and i and our dogs can crossover and have that experience sets play aside as something separate.
and yet i see it as something that's just as basic for survival -- long term -- as learning some of the basic things about public health.
how does the news shape the way we see the world?
and when we take out the u.s.
i know we can do better.
and can we afford not to?
hc: so our diners started to get bored with this idea, and we decided to give them the same course twice, so here we actually took an element from the maki roll and and took a picture of a dish and then basically served that picture with the dish.
instead of making foods that look like things that you wouldn't eat, we decided to make ingredients look like dishes that you know.
so this is a plate of nachos.
so we put this in the basement, and we got really serious about food, like serious experimentation.
you see a cow with its tongue hanging out.
what i see is a cow about to eat something delicious.
hc: so if miracle berries take sour things and turn them into sweet things, we have this other pixie dust that we put on the watermelon, and it makes it go from sweet to savory.
so the key now is to make it behave like tuna.
how can we take this idea of tricking your tastebuds and leapfrog it into something that we can do today that could be a disruptive food technology?
so i have a couple of really important questions for you.
and you can kind of think of this as a pyramid of this bubbling up of viruses from animals into human populations.
but only at the very top of this pyramid do these things become completely human.
one of the things i want you to note from it is blood -- that you see a tremendous amount of blood contact.
we look at the diseases, which are in the animals as well as the humans.
we stop for a drink of water.
they're also going to ask you the question that when we knew that this was the way that hiv entered into the human population, and that other diseases had the potential to enter like this, why did we let these behaviors continue?
one of them is just obtaining trust from individuals that we work with in the field.
the person you see on the right hand side is paul delong-minutu.
when i arrived i didn't speak a word of french, and i still seemed to understand what it was he was saying.
but -- when he began to speak they would actually recognize his voice from the radio.
but the reason i like to show the shot is because you can see that he's about to solve this problem.
this is what it looks like now.
we made a number of discoveries.
it had potential to really change the way that we saw ourselves, and thought about ourselves.
this is honestly the most exciting period ever for the study of unknown life forms on our planet.
the dominant things that exist here we know almost nothing about.
and i was looking around and i found this wonderful picture.
and somehow the idea that one would want to make art for the iphone, which my friends and i are doing now, is still not reflected in our understanding of what computers are for.
a lot of my work is about trying to get away from this.
song is one of our oldest ways of making ourselves heard and understood.
and he said one of them is called maluma.
and one of them is called taketa.
so the idea is you step into a kind of a magic light.
and as you do, you see the shadows of your own speech.
i got a split reaction to that during the live performance, because there is some people who understand live subtitles are a kind of an oxymoron, because usually there is someone making them afterwards.
and what could it do if it could look back at us?
and so those are the questions that are happening in the next projects.
so let me just switch over so we can do the live demo.
so each person is looking at the looking of everyone else before them.
and this exists in larger installations where there are thousands and thousands of eyes that people could be staring at, as you see who's looking at the people looking at the people looking before them.
so it blinks one second after you do.
like looking away if you look at it too long because it gets shy, or things like that.
it helps to have good friends.
and the idea is basically, can it look at you and make you feel as if like, "what?
but also have the body language communicate something to the person who is looking at it.
at this event, dozens of people are twittering and thousands of people are following along because they want to know what it feels like to be here and what's happening.
we liked this so much we actually bought the company and are folding it into the main product.
and this trend of people using this communication network to help each other out goes far beyond the original idea of just keeping up with family and friends.
it seems like when you give people easier ways to share information, more good things happen.
i have no idea what will happen next with twitter.
this is actually the most terrifying thing that any speaker can do after they've been to an event.
you have build something very fascinating, and it looks like its best times are still ahead of it.
and i would like to tell you a few personal stories about what i like to call "the danger of the single story."
my mother says that i started reading at the age of two, although i think four is probably close to the truth.
i had never been outside nigeria.
never mind that i had no idea what ginger beer was.
because all i had read were books in which characters were foreign, i had become convinced that books by their very nature had to have foreigners in them and had to be about things with which i could not personally identify.
i started to write about things i recognized.
but the unintended consequence was that i did not know that people like me could exist in literature.
so the year i turned eight we got a new house boy.
the only thing my mother told us about him was that his family was very poor.
all i had heard about them was how poor they were, so that it had become impossible for me to see them as anything else but poor.
she asked where i had learned to speak english so well, and was confused when i said that nigeria happened to have english as its official language.
she assumed that i did not know how to use a stove.
what struck me was this: she had felt sorry for me even before she saw me.
i must say that before i went to the u.s.
never mind that i knew nothing about places like namibia.
but i did come to embrace this new identity, and in many ways i think of myself now as african.
so after i had spent some years in the u.s.
now, i was quite willing to contend that there were a number of things wrong with the novel, that it had failed in a number of places, but i had not quite imagined that it had failed at achieving something called african authenticity.
but i must quickly add that i too am just as guilty in the question of the single story.
i had bought into the single story of mexicans and i could not have been more ashamed of myself.
it is impossible to talk about the single story without talking about power.
power is the ability not just to tell the story of another person, but to make it the definitive story of that person.
i recently spoke at a university where a student told me that it was such a shame that nigerian men were physical abusers like the father character in my novel.
i did not have a single story of america.
all of these stories make me who i am.
but to insist on only these negative stories is to flatten my experience and to overlook the many other stories that formed me.
they make one story become the only story.
but there are other stories that are not about catastrophe, and it is very important, it is just as important, to talk about them.
i've always felt that it is impossible to engage properly with a place or a person without engaging with all of the stories of that place and that person.
it emphasizes how we are different rather than how we are similar.
what if my mother had told us that fide's family was poor and hardworking?
now you must write a sequel, and this is what will happen ..."
and she went on to tell me what to write in the sequel.
she had not only read the book, but she had taken ownership of it and felt justified in telling me what to write in the sequel.
i would like to end with this thought: that when we reject the single story, when we realize that there is never a single story about any place, we regain a kind of paradise.
we make important decisions every day -- and we often rely on experts to help us decide.
in madrid, maria gonzalez is standing at the door, listening to her baby crying and crying, trying to work out whether she should let it cry until it falls asleep or pick it up and hold it.
and in an age that is sometimes nowadays frightening or confusing, we feel reassured by the almost parental-like authority of experts who tell us so clearly what it is we can and cannot do.
and they listened to whatever the experts said and took their advice, however right or wrong.
but experts do get things wrong.
so in order to help you understand where i'm coming from, let me bring you into my world, the world of experts.
they make mistakes every single day -- mistakes born out of carelessness.
but how can we do this?
all the research now shows us that this actually makes us smarter.
but we need to go even further.
the war is so worrying at present, with court cases coming up in one state after another, that i felt i had to say something about it.
i thought he must have been.
this is one nation under god."
some of us just go one god further.
in most cases, people who out themselves will help to destroy the myth that there is something wrong with atheists.
but in any case, that was more than 100 years ago.
you think we might have grown up since then.
the onus is not on the rest of us to say why not.
such people might be those belonging to the british lynch mob which last year attacked a pediatrician in mistake for a pedophile.
my god is a little god, and i want him to stay that way.'
if you're one of them, and of course many of you may not be, but if you are one of them, i'm asking you to stop being polite, come out and say so, and if you happen to be rich, give some thought to ways in which you might make a difference.
so how would you run a whole country without oil?
and i started playing with it more like a puzzle.
so that is not going to be the path to go.
now i started this from a point of view that it has to be something that scales en masse.
not how do you build one car, but how do you scale this so that it can become something that is used by 99 percent of the population?
the thought that came to mind is that it needs to be as good as any car that you would have today.
how do you do it from the power of the consumer up?
in a sense if you want to think about it this is the classic "batteries not included."
120 miles is a good enough range for a lot of people.
but you never want to get stuck.
you do it as a machine.
it looks like a car wash.
you come into your car wash.
we said that if you stop to swap your battery more than 50 times a year we start paying you money because it's an inconvenience.
then we looked at the question of the affordability.
what is the cost of that battery?
we can go back to the original economics of the car and look at it again.
we were asked in the past when we bought an electric car to pay for the entire well, for the life of the car.
now even if we get to 40 miles per gallon by 2020, which is our desire.
that is an 80 cent gallon.
now this would have been a wonderful paper.
it was a white paper i handed out to governments.
so we went out, and we looked at all the car companies.
we sent letters to all the car companies.
three of them never showed up.
one of them asked us if we would stay with hybrids and they would give us a discount.
when you want a fish you get a woman and when you need a woman you get a fish.
you've got to explain to me, what is more important than saving your country and saving the world, that you would go and do?"
and i had to quit and come and do this thing called a better place.
as i said we went to denmark.
if you fail the iq test they ask you to leave the country.
the third country we announced was australia.
the next island was not too hard to find, and that was hawaii.
we decided to come into the u.s.
and if you really have a long day you can switch, and keep on driving around the island.
as we stared scaling it up we looked at what is the problem to come up to the u.s.?
why is this a big issue?
the foundation of this curve is that we keep losing the wells that are close to the ground.
and we keep getting wells that are farther away from the ground.
it becomes more and more and more expensive to dig them out.
spent a ton of money to get oil.
we take our money and we give it away.
you know what happens at that point?
and the downs are going to be much longer and the ups are going to be much shorter.
now we actually looked at what the answer would be.
that is oh point oh well percent of the rest of the world.
you have to remember that the world today is bringing in so many cars.
they just put a tax on gasoline.
the indians don't even understand why we think of it as a problem because most people in india fill two or three gallons every time.
and some of it will go back to the car maker.
some of it will go back to your own pocket.
and we said, "what if we had proven that in the same space we found oil for the country for the next hundred years?"
we have to start thinking about giving kickers to countries that are willing to go to this kind of scale.
i actually shared that with some legislators here in the u.s.
i told him one of the reasons that his uncle was remembered is because he said we're going to send a man to the moon, and we'll do it by the end of the decade.
he actually shared with me another story, which is from about 200 years ago.
and what would it do to our economy?
we have to make it immediately.
we need to have presidential leadership just like we had in israel that said we will end oil.
do business here
what i want to do this morning is share with you a couple of stories and talk about a different africa.
this is the africa where people want to take charge of their own futures and their own destinies.
and i want to start by telling you a story about that change in africa.
but what happened: people were so outraged by this behavior that it was possible for his state legislature to impeach him and get him out of office.
this is a story about the fact that people want their resources managed properly for their good, and not taken out to places where they'll benefit just a few of the elite.
does it mean the problem is over?
but the truth of the matter is that this is going on.
and let me say just one more thing before i leave this area of governance.
all the time when they talk about it you immediately think about africa.
so when we talk about this kind of corruption, let us also think about what is happening on the other side of the globe -- where the money's going and what can be done to stop it.
because if we can get the 20 billion dollars sitting out there back, it may be far more for some of these countries than all the aid that is being put together.
the second thing i want to talk about is the will for reform.
we are grateful, but we know that we can take charge of our own destinies if we have the will to reform.
and what is happening in many african countries now is a realization that no one can do it but us.
and this is what we started to do in one of the largest countries on the continent, nigeria.
i want to tell you that.
what we started to do was to realize that we had to take charge and reform ourselves.
not the world bank, where i worked for 21 years and rose to be a vice president.
no one can do it for you.
you have to do it for yourself.
you had to do everything to get your phone.
when they kept this under wraps, but soon others got to know.
so what did we try to do?
so all the changes and reforms we were able to make have shown up in results that are measurable in the economy.
we have a lot of minerals that no one has even invested in or explored.
too many not doing their real business.
but managing the tourism market in a way that can really benefit the people is very important.
so what am i trying to say?
and i want to just make one point about this investment.
the best way to help africans today is to help them to stand on their own feet.
and the best way to do that is by helping create jobs.
but imagine the impact on a family: if the parents can be employed and make sure that their children go to school, that they can buy the drugs to fight the disease themselves.
if we can invest in places where you yourselves make money whilst creating jobs and helping people stand on their own feet, isn't that a wonderful opportunity?
and i want to say that some of the best people to invest in on the continent are the women.
so that shows you that we have people who are capable of doing.
but i'm standing here saying that those who miss the boat now, will miss it forever.
so if you want to be in africa, think about investing.
when you go to tanzania, listen carefully, because i'm sure you will hear of the various openings that there will be for you to get involved in something that will do good for the continent, for the people and for yourselves.
and that meant they were market based, or they were government owned, depending on what kind of system they were in.
so, the story that most people know is the story of free or open source software.
but the thing to see is that this actually happens throughout the web.
this is not only outside of businesses.
we also see this in wireless.
these are working models that at least in some places in the united states are being implemented, at least for public security.
it used to be that there were two primary dimensions along which you could divide things.
we do it all the time.
you have to hire them to spend a lot of time.
it is about the future of the freedom to be as social beings with each other, and the way information, knowledge and culture will be produced.
because it is in this context that we see a battle over how easy or hard it will be for the industrial information economy to simply go on as it goes, or for the new model of production to begin to develop alongside that industrial model, and change the way we begin to see the world and report what it is that we see.
do you worry about what is going to kill you?
but when was the last time you worried about smallpox, a disease that killed half a billion people last century and no longer is with us?
how many of you remember the iron lung?
so the real question then is: how do we ensure that your body makes the exact ones that we need to protect against flu and hiv?
newer concepts and early testing now show even greater promise in the best of our animal models.
if you take these and you put them in the best of our monkey models, they provide full protection from infection.
so think of it this way.
let me give you another example.
so i want you to think back a few months ago.
the system is reliable but the problem is you never know how well a strain is going to grow.
supply was cut in half by contamination at one single plant.
so are we better prepared than we were in 1918?
now think of where this leads us.
what the world needs now are these new vaccines, and we can make it happen.
the world needs people like you.
what we have now is the end of the rise of the west.
education is the main event that can happen in cities.
even before they do that they will ask for foreign aid.
they're not going to wait for government to do things for them.
there are certain things that we need to recognize.
did you know that 40 percent of the wealth created in africa is not invested here in africa?
there are people who think that we should pour more money, more aid into this bowl which leaks.
there is the people, and then there is the government or leaders.
i asked them to name me just 20.
even if they had been able to name me 20, what does that tell you?
government is the problem in africa.
where do they get their money?
it is a total far cry.
that is not the kind of system africans had known for centuries.
the men are going fishing in these small boats.
a bigger boat will mean more fish will be caught and landed.
it means that he will be able to employ more ghanaians.
it also means that he will be able to generate wealth.
and i know that with the cheetahs, we can take africa back one village at a time.
and it's truly a great honor to have the opportunity to come to this stage twice.
i have been blown away by this conference, and i want to thank all of you for the many nice comments about what i had to say the other night.
it was dinnertime, and we started looking for a place to eat.
she took our order, and then went to the couple in the booth next to us, and she lowered her voice so much i had to really strain to hear what she was saying.
i began the speech by telling them the story of what had just happened the day before in nashville.
i woke up, they opened the door, i went out to get some fresh air, and i looked and there was a man running across the runway.
and i thought to myself, in the middle of the night, in the middle of the atlantic, what in the world could be wrong in washington?
before i could get back to u.s.
but i was thinking that since i plan to make a lifelong habit of coming back to ted, that maybe i could talk about that another time.
i add new images because i learn more about it every time i give it.
those of you who are good at branding, i'd love to get your advice and help on how to say this in a way that connects with the most people.
it is easier than you think.
a lot of us in here have made that decision and it is really pretty easy.
a lot more to be said about that.
and it comes out in may.
many of you here have the opportunity to ensure that a lot of people see it.
this used to be a bipartisan issue, and i know that in this group it really is.
the market will work to solve this problem if we can accomplish this.
we have to buy a lot of those ads.
you have more influence than some of us who are democrats do.
this is the ocean as i used to know it.
but what i want to talk to you about today is a lot of things that try to put all of this in context, not just about the oil eruption, but what it means and why it has happened.
and now i mainly write books about how the ocean is changing, and the ocean is certainly changing very rapidly.
now we saw this kind of graphic earlier on, that we really live on a hard marble that has just a slight bit of wetness to it.
so the blowout in the gulf is just a little piece of a much larger problem that we have with the energy that we use to run civilization.
if you go to the gulf and you look around, you do see a lot of oil.
you see a lot of oil on the ocean.
you see a lot of oil on the shoreline.
you go in along the shore, you can find it everywhere.
and they have a very strange way of cleaning up the beach.
if you go to the place where the oil has been a while, it's an even bigger mess.
you see people who are really shell-shocked.
these are the things that you can see.
some people say there are not oil plumes.
but i couldn't take a submarine ride -- especially between the time i knew i was coming here and today -- so i had to do a little experiment myself to see if there was oil in the gulf of mexico.
i created a little oil spill in the gulf of mexico.
when it breaks up, it has a long way to go before it gets down to bacteria.
i heard the most incredible story today when i was on the train coming here.
he said that he had been in the gulf a little while ago -- like about a week ago -- and a guy who had been a recreational fishing guide took him out to show him what's going on.
and he moved away because it was his last fishing trip, and he knew that the dolphins scare fish.
so he moved away from it, turned around a few minutes later, it was right next to the side of the boat again.
he said that in 30 years of fishing he had never seen a dolphin do that.
and he felt that -- he felt that it was coming to ask for help.
the other thing about the gulf that is important is that there are a lot of animals that concentrate in the gulf at certain parts of the year.
they go all the way to europe.
i'm hoping that maybe the adults are avoiding that dirty water.
and we just seem to be unable to figure out what to do.
that one on the right is called fishing fool.
you can see easily that all the oily water just goes over the back of the boom.
there is ample opportunity for oil and dirty water to get in behind them.
and you have to really wonder who are the laws made for, and who has gotten above the laws.
now there are things that we can do in the future.
we could have the kinds of equipment that we would really need.
but i think we have to understand where this leak really started from.
it really started from the destruction of the idea that the government is there because it's our government, meant to protect the larger public interest.
we still seem to understand that at least we need the police to protect us from a few bad people.
but in the entire rest of government right now and for the last at least 30 years, there has been a culture of deregulation that is caused directly by the people who we need to be protected from, buying the government out from under us.
now this has been a problem for a very, very long time.
so what we really need to do is regain the idea that it's our government safeguarding our interests and regain a sense of unity and common cause in our country that really has been lost.
i think there are signs of hope.
now are we stuck with this?
and i want to talk about what a web based on that idea of relevance might look like.
and i was sure that it was going to be great for democracy and for our society.
so i first noticed this in a place i spend a lot of time -- my facebook page.
and so i was surprised when i noticed one day that the conservatives had disappeared from my facebook feed.
if i search for something, and you search for something, even right now at the very same time, we may get very different search results.
you can't see how different your search results are from anyone else's.
and this was the big story of the day at that time.
and this moves us very quickly toward a world in which the internet is showing us what it thinks we want to see, but not necessarily what we need to see.
so i do think this is a problem.
but the thing is that you don't decide what gets in.
you know we all want to be someone who has watched "rashomon," but right now we want to watch "ace ventura" for the fourth time.
then people noticed that they were doing something really important.
we need you to make sure that they're transparent enough that we can see what the rules are that determine what gets through our filters.
and we need you to give us some control so that we can decide what gets through and what doesn't.
because i think we really need the internet to be that thing that we all dreamed of it being.
we need it to introduce us to new ideas and new people and different perspectives.
and yet, i would like to think that i am more than my genes.
are you more than your genes?
i think some people agree with me.
i think we should make a statement.
i think we should say it all together.
i could just go home now.
but this is just a single neuron.
in order to find connectomes, we have to see all the neurons at the same time.
and you can see that the green neuron touches the red neuron at two locations, and these are what are called synapses.
at the synapse, the two neurons are said to be connected like two friends talking on the telephone.
so you see how to find a synapse.
if we can do that throughout all the images, we could find a connectome.
why did i choose to study this organ that is so awesome in its complexity that it might well be infinite?
how could we even dare to think that we might ever understand this?
it will take the work of generations to succeed.
but even that will be enough for the first tests of this hypothesis that i am my connectome.
and if you put those two facts together, it means that your experiences can change your connectome.
and it might true that just the mere act of thinking can change your connectome -- an idea that you may find empowering.
what else is in this picture?
without it, the water would not know in which direction to flow.
and so we might even speak of the stream of consciousness.
so one way of trying to test the theory is to look for such chains inside connectomes.
and if that were successful, that would be the first example of reading a memory from a connectome.
if you believe that i am my connectome, i think you must also accept the idea that death is the destruction of your connectome.
one of their most cherished dreams is to cheat death by that practice known as cryonics.
resurrection might succeed for the body, but not for the mind.
now go ahead and open it up.
we spent a long time thinking about why this is, and it's just recently that we realized: it's when we see something unexpected, it changes our understanding of the way things work.
but to really think about the implications of what this makes possible, we found that it helps to think about how it could be applied in the world.
imagine taking the same material, but putting it on the bottom of a sneaker.
but we've found that the way we present our ideas it makes a big difference.
these things just get him really excited.
he sold it to you as if it was for sale right now.
when we were going in the car back to the airport, we were thinking: why was this so powerful?
and as we thought about it more, we realized that it let you fill in all the details about the experience, just as if you saw it on tv.
so i just want to quickly explain how this would work.
this is the magnetically-levitating board that they mentioned in the commercial.
now this is important for two reasons.
in our brainstorms, we came up with the idea you could use it for a soccer goal: so at the end of the game, you just roll up the goal and put it in your gym bag.
so we decided to go out onto the streets of chicago and ask a few people on the streets what they thought you could do with this.
we need you to stand right in front of the ted sign.
and the reason it feels cold is because it evaporates 25 times faster than water.
so during halftime, it could rain down on the players, cool everyone down, and in a matter of minutes it would dry.
you see the dark line on the side and the top.
so the smell of vanilla, that might change the four on the left to brown and the one on the right to yellow.
so, a patient can come in and actually blow into their device.
ks: so that was the six we had for you today, but i hope you're starting to see why we find these things so fascinating.
because every one of these six changed our understanding of what was possible in the world.
he said that he was playing with it with his son.
a few weeks later, he said that his son was playing with a lock of his mother's hair, and he noticed that there were some drops of water on the hair.
i went to spain a few months ago and i had the best foie gras of my life.
more grain in a couple of weeks than it would ever get in a lifetime.
it makes everything else you put it with taste incredible.
not a lot of people are doing it.
it was all over the papers.
they accused him of paying off the judges.
he repeated that about 50 times in the two days i was with him.
he kept going like this to me.
but he was still going like this.
i kind of like asked these questions and chatted with him through a translator in kind of a half whisper.
he felt like they felt manipulated.
so he got rid of the electricity, he got rid of current on the inside and kept it on the outside, so it would protect them against coyotes and other predators.
it really is the garden of eden.
and they are allowed to take whatever they want.
they get what they want, they leave the rest for me and i sell it.
is he making some of this up?
and his geese are calling up now to the wild geese.
to fly south in the winter and north when it gets warm?"
think about that for a minute.
i finally got to taste it before i left.
we went back out for the final tour of the farm, and he showed me the wild pepper plants and the plants that he made sure existed on his farm for salinity.
what the hell does that mean?
they were looking for an alternative.
the pharaoh got wind of this and wanted to taste it.
he tasted it and fell in love with it.
and he demanded that the jews supply enough for everyone.
most of what we eat today.
it's an insult to the basic laws of nature and of biology.
if human beings disappeared, life on earth as we know it would flourish."
one in which we stop treating the planet as if it were some kind of business in liquidation.
we can start by looking to farmers like eduardo.
and what he showed me and what he can show all of us, i think, is that the great thing for chefs, the great blessing for chefs, and for people that care about food and cooking, is that the most ecological choice for food is also the most ethical choice for food.
how do we make sure that development and aid money actually goes to the people who most need it?
only i later realized that what he fed me was food for his entire family for two days.
though he was no lawyer, he argued the case in court himself the next day.
after, there is people like me, who try to deserve to exist, and who are so ashamed to make this useless job, who try to do it in another way, and they try, i try, to not make the object for the object but for the result, for the profit for the human being, the person who will use it.
what is the life of the owner of this mouth?
but to come back, where i am at the animal species, there is things to see.
because the bacteria we was had no idea of what we are today.
i am not sure of that.
the more you will rise, the more you will be important for the civilization.
the more you will rise, to see far and high, like that, the more you will be important for the story of our mutation.
that means intelligent people are in this angle.
because some cycle, there is a spot in the cycle, and you have not the same duty in the different parts of the cycle.
and because we must all work to finish this story.
we have just to finish the story.
the only rule is, we have not to have any idea about the next story.
i want you to take a look at this baby.
what we see here is that language has a critical period for learning.
the way to read this slide is to look at your age on the horizontal axis.
work in my lab is focused on the first critical period in development -- and that is the period in which babies try to master which sounds are used in their language.
if they do so at the appropriate time, the black box lights up and a panda bear pounds a drum.
well, babies all over the world are what i like to describe as "citizens of the world."
so at six to eight months the babies are totally equivalent.
the babies in the united states are getting a lot better, babies in japan are getting a lot worse, but both of those groups of babies are preparing for exactly the language that they are going to learn.
so there are two things going on.
so what we're seeing here is changing our models of what the critical period is about.
it was like having mandarin relatives come and visit for a month and move into your house and talk to the babies for 12 sessions.
so a group of babies came in and listened to english.
but we wondered what role the human being played in this learning exercise.
so we ran another group of babies in which the kids got the same dosage, the same 12 sessions, but over a television set and another group of babies who had just audio exposure and looked at a teddy bear on the screen.
what did we do to their brains?
it takes a human being for babies to take their statistics.
we want to get inside the brain and see this thing happening as babies are in front of televisions, as opposed to in front of human beings.
speaking at tedxcairo, he tells the inside story of the past two months, when everyday egyptians showed that "the power of the people is stronger than the people in power."
it was actually really inspiring to see all these egyptians completely changing.
and it's not because people were happy or people were not frustrated.
there were actually a few brave egyptians that i have to thank for being so brave -- going into protests as a couple of hundred, getting beaten up and arrested.
everyone did not want really to get in trouble.
they want to make people live in fear.
there are a lot of people who are frustrated."
there are lots of people who are frustrated.
there are lots of people who actually share the same dream.
there are lots of people who care about their freedom.
they are living in their villas.
but they are still feeling the pain of the egyptian.
a lot of us, we're not really happy when we see a video of an egyptian man who's eating the trash while others are stealing billions of egyptian pounds from the wealth of the country.
but then what was the answer of the regime?
get those who killed this guy.
to just bring them to justice."
it was an amazing story -- how everyone started feeling the ownership.
everyone was an owner in this page.
people were making fun of the idea.
but actually when people went to the street -- the first time it was thousands of people in alexandria -- it felt like -- it was amazing.
and they were doing this thing.
everything was done by the people to the people, and that's the power of the internet.
the leader was everyone on that page.
we have the same problems; we can just go in the streets.
and when i saw the street on the 25th, i went back and said, "egypt before the 25th is never going to be egypt after the 25th.
this is not the end, this is the beginning of the end."
and i did not really hear anything.
i was not allowed to speak with anyone.
the next day i was in tahrir.
seriously, with the amount of change i had noticed in this square, i thought it was 12 years.
i never had in my mind to see this egyptian, the amazing egyptian.
the fear is no longer fear.
it was amazing how everyone was so empowered and now asking for their rights.
this whole revolution showed us how ugly such a regime was and how great and amazing the egyptian man, the egyptian woman, how simple and amazing these people are whenever they have a dream.
when i saw that, i went back and i wrote on facebook.
we're going to win because the tears that come from our eyes actually come from our hearts.
we're going to win because we are willing to stand up for our dreams."
i feel that i have dignity that i have lost for so many years."
my last word to you is a statement i believe in, which egyptians have proven to be true, that the power of the people is much stronger than the people in power.
i looked into the face of her son sitting next to her, and his face was just riven with grief and confusion.
i looked into the face of one of these women, and i saw in her face the strength that arises when natural compassion is really present.
my gaze went to another young woman as she wiped the face of another dying person.
and it reminded me of something that i had just been present for.
i know those hands and eyes; they touched me as well.
they touched me at that time.
they touched me when i was four and i lost my eyesight and was partially paralyzed.
and my family brought in a woman whose mother had been a slave to take care of me.
it is that ability to really stand strong and to recognize also that i'm not separate from this suffering.
now i worked with dying people for over 40 years.
and i realized so clearly in bringing my own life experience, from working with dying people and training caregivers, that any attachment to outcome would distort deeply my own capacity to be fully present to the whole catastrophe.
and when i worked in the prison system, it was so clear to me, this: that many of us in this room, and almost all of the men that i worked with on death row, the seeds of their own compassion had never been watered.
the very word terror is global.
the very feeling of terror is global.
for example: a person who is cultivating compassion, when they are in the presence of suffering, they feel that suffering a lot more than many other people do.
they have infused societies with kindness, and we have really felt that as woman after woman has stood on this stage in the past day and a half.
but the other side of the equation is you've got to come out of your cave.
he sees something in the path.
he sees that the dog has this big wound on its leg.
the wound is just filled with maggots.
he puts out his tongue in order to remove the maggots, so as not to harm them.
the women in this room are lotuses in a sea of fire.
and he started asking me questions.
can you say 'i will kill you in the name of allah?'"
i want to play a bad guy.
all it takes in one person to mess it up.
and the name came out jack.
and you learn great things about these places.
i encourage people always to go visit these places.
and when you put your two year-old on a slide in the united states, they put something on the slide to slow the kid down as he comes down the slide.
but one of the things i try to do with my stand-up is to break stereotypes.
and i got it in my head that all the indians there must be workers.
then why were you staring at me?"
so i would like to show you something i've been working on.
and i borrowed these three ipods from people here in the audience to show you what i mean.
he had this wonderful trick where a rosebush would bloom right in front of your eyes.
mt: i like to think of myself as an honest magician.
i use a lot of tricks, which means that sometimes i have to lie to you.
now i feel bad about that.
that's when we convince ourselves that a lie is the truth.
they forget the times they lose.
and when you give yourself over to that deception, it becomes magic.
15 years ago i received a phone call from a friend.
at the time he was looking after the rights of political prisoners in italian jails.
he asked me if i wanted to interview the red brigades.
and i was one of those people.
when i asked my friend why the red brigades want to talk to me, he said that the female members of the organization had actually supported my name.
she had joined the red brigades and became a leader of the organization.
but this is exactly what i did because i wanted to know what had turned my best friend into a terrorist, and why she'd never tried to recruit me.
they were constantly short of cash.
they were constantly searching for cash.
and he had this beautiful boat.
and he told me that the best time of his life was when he was a member of the red brigades and he went sailing, every summer, back and forth from lebanon, where he would pick up soviet weapons from the plo, and then carry them all the way to sardinia where the other arms organization from europe would go and take their share of the arms.
i was having lunch with him in a high-security prison in italy.
and as we were eating, i had the distinct feeling that i was back in the city of london, having lunch with a fellow banker or an economist.
in fact, i think many people thought that i was a bit crazy.
and there are three main stages.
but above all, they started to do serious business with the world of crime.
and together they money-laundered their dirty business through the same channel.
but also that is able to carry out attacks in more than one country.
it has happened before in history.
it has happened with the fall of the roman empire.
these were money taken out by criminals and money launderers.
that means that it has a privilege that other countries do not have.
no other country can do that.
all the other countries, for example the united kingdom, can borrow only against the amount of money in circulation inside its own borders.
this is how close we are with this world.
part of the war on terror was the introduction of the patriot act.
and this is what people did.
i told you this story because you must understand that there is a world that goes well beyond the headlines of the newspapers, including the personal relationship that you have with friends and family.
you got to question everything that is told to you, including what i just told you today.
this is the only way for you to step into the dark side, and have a look at it.
this has given me a very special relationship with the ocean.
i feel a bit about it like i did about a very strict math teacher that i once had at school.
so today i'd like to share with you some of my ocean adventures and tell you a little bit about what they've taught me, and how i think we can maybe take some of those lessons and apply them to this environmental challenge that we face right now.
isn't she meant to be about this tall and about this wide and maybe look a bit more like these guys?"
the story that i told myself was that adventurers looked like this.
i thought there were them and there were us, and i was not one of them.
i did what people from my kind of background were supposed to do.
and i think i knew from day one that it wasn't the right job for me.
to try and answer that question of, "what am i supposed to be doing with my life?"
i wanted to live a life that i could be proud of.
if i carry on living as i am now, i'm just not going to end up where i want to be in five years, or 10 years, or at the end of my life."
so i just had to look around the boat and figure out what i was going to use to fix up these oars so that i could carry on.
and the oars kind of became a symbol of just in how many ways i went beyond what i thought were my limits.
there were so many times when i thought i'd hit that limit, but had no choice but to just carry on and try and figure out how i was going to get to the other side without driving myself crazy.
and i really learned then that, the bigger the challenge, the bigger the sense of achievement when you get to the end of it.
so this might be a good moment to take a quick time-out to answer a few faqs about ocean rowing that might be going through your mind.
so i grow my own beansprouts.
and generally arrive about 30 pounds lighter at the other end.
on a good night, i think my best ever was 11 miles in the right direction.
do i have a chase boat?
i think we tend to do it a little bit of a disservice in our usual maps.
a bit like being in a washing machine.
the first i knew about this was when the coast guard plane turned up overhead.
i tried to tell them to go away.
we had a bit of a battle of wills.
it was one of the worst feelings of my life, as i was lifted up on that winch line into the helicopter and looked down at my trusty little boat rolling around in the 20 foot waves and wondering if i would ever see her again.
so i had to launch a very expensive salvage operation and then wait another nine months before i could get back out onto the ocean again.
but it was not without misadventure.
they were running out of food; i was running out of water.
and it took about a week for us to actually gradually converge.
fortunately, the one that he caught that day was better than this one they caught a few weeks earlier.
when they opened this one up, they found its stomach was full of plastic.
this is big trouble for these guys.
and that made me think about how would i feel if britain was going to disappear under the waves; if the places where i'd been born and gone to school and got married, if all those places were just going to disappear forever.
the first one is about the stories that we tell ourselves.
i found out that people had rowed across oceans.
i even met one of them and she was just about my size.
but what about if we just change that story?
anything that we do spreads ripples.
for so much of my life, i wanted something else to make me happy.
i thought if i had the right house or the right car or the right man in my life, then i could be happy.
but when i wrote that obituary exercise, i actually grew up a little bit in that moment and realized that i needed to create my own future.
i plan on being around for a long time, and when i'm 90 years old, i want to be happy and healthy.
i really believe that we stand at a very important point in history.
we can choose a greener future, and we can get there if we all pull together to take it one stroke at a time.
this is about a place in london called kiteflyer's hill where i used to go and spend hours going "when is he coming back?
and you want to go back and do it again.
and our own opportunity to make something new there?
these are just not things we talked about very often.
and so we got this, or we had a choice of that.
this one, this is going to be the new world trade center: a giant hole in the ground with big buildings falling into it.
and that kind of fight has gone on back and forth in architecture all the time.
everyone here must own one, or at least they craved one the moment they saw one.
why do you want to do that?
why do we all want to do that?
can i have the lights off for a moment?
they all want to save money by building the same thing 500 times.
and when you go to the beach, what do you get?
and those are the pieces of wood.
and here comes dune-scape, coming up out of the courtyard, and there it is fully built.
and they were able to do it.
this is the other side of the coin.
the reason it has so much color is that it changes using lighting.
under the bed is not a good hiding spot.
and at the same time we were being told what we were, we were being asked, "what do you want to be when you grow up?"
when i was a kid, i wanted to be a man.
and when i was 10, i was told that my parents left because they didn't want me.
see, they asked me what i wanted to be, then told me what not to be.
we were being told that we somehow must become what we are not, sacrificing what we are to inherit the masquerade of what we will be.
i was being told to accept the identity that others will give me.
and i wondered, what made my dreams so easy to dismiss?
i was going to be a wrestler.
i was going to be the garbage man.
my finishing move was going to be the trash compactor.
like a boomerang, the thing i loved came back to me.
one of the first lines of poetry i can remember writing was in response to a world that demanded i hate myself.
from age 15 to 18, i hated myself for becoming the thing that i loathed: a bully.
i gave myself a hall pass to get through each broken promise.
he got his paper back expecting a near-perfect score, and couldn't believe it when he looked across the room at me and held up a zero.
this is how i stand up for myself.
and because my grandmother thought it was cute, and because they were my favorite, she let me keep doing it.
i didn't want to tell my grandmother about it because i was scared i'd get in trouble for playing somewhere i shouldn't have been.
from there, i was sent to another small room with a really nice lady who asked me all kinds of questions about my life at home.
i saw no reason to lie.
this led to a full-scale investigation, and i was removed from the house for three days, until they finally decided to ask how i got the bruises.
news of this silly little story quickly spread through the school, and i earned my first nickname: porkchop.
i'm not the only kid who grew up this way, surrounded by people who used to say that rhyme about sticks and stones, as if broken bones hurt more than the names we got called, and we got called them all.
so we grew up believing no one would ever fall in love with us, that we'd be lonely forever, that we'd never meet someone to make us feel like the sun was something they built for us in their toolshed.
she was eight years old, our first day of grade three when she got called ugly.
we both got moved to the back of class so we would stop getting bombarded by spitballs.
we used to stay inside for recess, because outside was worse.
seems like every school has an arsenal of names getting updated every year, and if a kid breaks in a school and no one around chooses to hear, do they make a sound?
but i want to tell them that all of this is just debris left over when we finally decide to smash all the things we thought we used to be, and if you can't see anything beautiful about yourself, get a better mirror, look a little closer, stare a little longer, because there's something inside you that made you keep trying despite everyone who told you to quit.
you built a cast around your broken heart and signed it yourself.
because maybe you didn't belong to a group or a clique.
maybe they decided to pick you last for basketball or everything.
maybe you used to bring bruises and broken teeth to show-and-tell, but never told, because how can you hold your ground if everyone around you wants to bury you beneath it?
you have to believe that they were wrong.
why else would we still be here?
we stem from a root planted in the belief that we are not what we were called.
we only got out to walk and get gas.
but our lives will only ever always continue to be a balancing act that has less to do with pain and more to do with beauty.
loads of eye tricks help him prove that not only are we easily fooled, we kind of like it.
and i was thinking about this.
i want you first of all when it pops up on the screen to notice that the two holes are perpendicular to each other.
what does that tell you about yourselves?
see if you can stop it from happening.
why would we find them joyful?
this is what you would see.
how many of you here see dolphins?
raise your hand if you see dolphins.
if you are a child under the age of 10 who haven't been ruined yet, you will look at this image and see dolphins.
now, something like this can be used because this is after all talk about design, too.
this was done by saatchi and saatchi, and they actually got away with this ad in australia.
here is an outside water fountain that i created with some friends of mine, but you can stop the water in drops and -- actually make all the drops levitate.
how many people see this illusion?
you can see the woman is in closer than the wall and so forth.
but the whole thing is actually flat.
like this building in new york.
so that when you see it from this side, it looks like the balconies tilt up, and when you walk around to the other side it looks like the balconies go down.
so that when you saw from one little angle was like this.
this was hung on a wall where you could walk down from the stair and you can see this hidden skull.
this is a pile of junk that when you view it from one particular angle, you see its reflection in the mirror as a perfect piano.
it gives a shadow of a motorcycle.
you learn something in the sort of thing that i do, which is there are people out there with a lot of time on their hands.
right now is the most exciting time to see new indian art.
she says she first got started with 10 packets of bindis, and then wondered what she could do with 10 thousand.
and light and shadow are a very important part of her work.
thank you very much for looking and listening.
well, i hope to change that in less than three minutes.
i want you to be excited.
i want you to be relieved.
literally, you will live seven and half minutes longer than you would have otherwise, just because you watched this talk.
your mission is to figure out how you want to spend your extra seven and a half minutes.
now this is a totally reasonable assumption, given that i have made quite a habit of encouraging people to spend more time playing games.
this idea is so pervasive -- that games are a waste of time that we will come to regret -- that i hear it literally everywhere i go.
imagine getting to the end of your life and regretting all that time."
i mean, i want games to be a force for good in the world.
so i have been thinking about this question a lot lately.
number two: i wish i had stayed in touch with my friends.
i wish i'd had the courage to express my true self.
i wish i'd led a life true to my dreams, and not what others expected of me.
but recently i did spend three months in bed, wanting to die.
now let me tell you that story.
it started two years ago, when i hit my head and got a concussion.
my doctor told me that in order to heal my brain, i had to rest it.
in other words -- and i think you see where this is going -- no reason to live.
it happens to one in three, and it happened to me.
and these voices became so persistent and so persuasive that i started to legitimately fear for my life, which is the time that i said to myself after 34 days -- and i will never forget this moment -- i said, i am either going to kill myself or i'm going to turn this into a game.
this was an easier way to ask for help.
this was anything i could do on even my worst day to feel just a little bit good, just a little bit productive.
things like cuddling my dog for 10 minutes, or getting out of bed and walking around the block just once.
but even when i still had the symptoms, even while i was still in pain, i stopped suffering.
and i could tell from their messages and their videos that the game was helping them in the same ways that it helped me.
they talked about feeling stronger and braver.
they talked about feeling better understood by their friends and family.
i feel closer to my friends and family.
i know who i really am now.
i have a new sense of meaning and purpose in my life.
or better yet, is there a way to get all the benefits of post-traumatic growth without the trauma, without having to hit your head in the first place?
i'd rather we all start building them up together right now.
this is where you earn those seven and a half minutes of bonus life that i promised you earlier.
and i feel like you can do it.
pick one: stand up and take three steps, or make your hands into fists, raise them over your head as high as you can for five seconds.
now we know from the research that the number one thing you can do to boost your physical resilience is to not sit still.
that means that all of you who just shook hands are biochemically primed to like and want to help each other.
how are you going to spend these seven and a half minutes of bonus life?
you can use your first wish to wish for a million more wishes.
and the good news is, you can keep going like that.
every hour of the day, every day of your life, all the way to your deathbed, which will now be 10 years later than it would have otherwise.
and when you get there, more than likely, you will not have any of those top five regrets, because you will have built up the strength and resilience to lead a life truer to your dreams.
and with 10 extra years, you might even have enough time to play a few more games.
indeed thousands of people have actually been involved in this project, in many of its different aspects.
but let me first begin by showing you some pictures of what this thing looks like.
just to give you an idea of scale, that installation there is about six feet across, and the tallest models are about two or three feet high.
that one on the right is about five feet high.
and indeed there are now thousands and thousands of models that people have contributed all over the world as part of this.
on the right hand side, that bit there is part of an installation that is about 12 feet long.
and i went and put a little announcement up on our site, asking for people to join us in this enterprise.
what i do is i write books about the cultural history of physics.
so i said yes to this proposition.
so we went and taught the techniques.
but it turns out there is a very good reason why we are crocheting it because many organisms in coral reefs have a very particular kind of structure.
it happens to be a fact.
the first one she did was knitting.
but what she was doing was actually making a model of a mathematical structure, that many mathematicians had thought it was actually impossible to model.
so here we have a line and a point outside the line.
and you all know the answer.
does someone want to shout it out?
and i have a point outside the line.
how many straight lines can i draw through the point but never meet the original line?
what do we mean to talk about a straight line on a curved surface?
this is what it looks like.
mathematicians for several hundred years had to really struggle with this.
what did it mean to actually have a physical model that looked like this?
but look, i can prove to you that they're straight because i can take any one of these lines, and i can fold along it.
it turns out that the natural world is full of hyperbolic wonders.
and all of our contributors, who are an amazing collection of people around the world, do their own embellishments.
there is the totality of all the people who have come to it.
but you can do it through playing with material objects.
he believed that the crystal was the model for all kinds of representation.
and he is worthy of an entire talk on his own right.
we live in a society now where we have lots of think tanks, where great minds go to think about the world.
and i just want you to think for a minute about what this entails.
so let me give you a few striking examples of this.
you can call it the face area of the brain, right?
you look just like my mother."
if only i could move it, maybe the pain will be relieved."
what you do is you create what i call a mirror box.
and my pain is being relieved."
i thought maybe the mirror box was gone.
he thought i was some kind of magician.
bear in mind, these people are completely normal in other respects.
one of the two aspects of this problem are very intriguing.
remember i said it runs in families?
in all of us, it turns out we are born with everything wired to everything else.
my talk will be in two parts.
i'll talk first as an astronomer, and then as a worried member of the human race.
and let me just run through a few slides.
this was the impact that happened last week on a comet.
and we can see places where stars are forming, like the eagle nebula.
this picture shows a patch of sky so small that it would take about 100 patches like it to cover the full moon in the sky.
each is a galaxy, fully like ours or andromeda, which looks so small and faint because its light has taken 10 billion light-years to get to us.
and we'll end up after 13 billion years with something looking rather like our own universe.
the everyday world is determined by atoms, how they stick together to make molecules.
you want to not only synthesize the very large and the very small, but we want to understand the very complex.
it would take as many human bodies to make up the sun as there are atoms in each of us.
but they will have a dark side.
he wanted to give up the dangerous kind of science and keep the good bits.
and so what this means is that we have to accept the risks if we are going to enjoy the benefits of science.
we have to accept that there will be hazards.
and he sets an example of the concerned scientist.
so we are still at the beginning of the emergence of complexity in our earth and beyond.
as i should have shown this earlier, it will not be humans who witness the end point of the sun; it will be creatures as different from us as we are from bacteria.
then other things happened even more abruptly.
their sexual behavior is too human-like for most of us to be comfortable with.
and i think perhaps somewhere in our history we sort of, divided our lives up into lots of parts.
we divided our world up with lots of categories.
and so everything sort of has a place that it has to fit.
to our knowledge they had no music.
but there are a lot of similarities.
and i think that as we look at culture, we kind of come to understand how we got to where we are.
so what i want to do now is introduce you to a species called the bonobo.
and she came to us when she was just at puberty, about six or seven years of age.
and now we see all four.
none of the things you will see in this particular video are trained.
i have a lighter in my pocket if you need one.
i hope i have a lighter.
you can use the lighter to start the fire.
he doesn't do it yet without a lighter, but i think if he saw someone do it, he might be able to do -- make a fire without a lighter.
but he likes to carry things from place to place.
she keeps staring out the window.
they speak when she touches them.
sue where she wants to go.
soon she began to write as well.
once you have that capacity, the ability to produce language comes rather naturally and rather freely.
is he looking for where the sound came from?
do that real fast part that you did.
now you can chase them again.
now you have to stay away.
now we can chase them again.
michael norton: how to buy happiness
so i want to talk today about money and happiness, which are two things that a lot of us spend a lot of our time thinking about, either trying to earn them or trying to increase them.
so that instead of spending it the way you usually spend it, maybe if you spent it differently, that might work a little bit better.
and before i tell you the ways that you can spend it that will make you happier, let's think about the ways we usually spend it that don't, in fact, make us happier.
we had a little natural experiment.
it turns out people think when they win the lottery their lives are going to be amazing.
so they have more debt and worse friendships than they had before they won the lottery.
and here's just two of the ones we saw that are just really interesting to think about.
anyone begging for money or trying to extort from me would receive a copy of the picture and nothing else."
it also, money often makes us feel very selfish and we do things only for ourselves.
and we thought, i wonder what would happen if we made people spend more of their money on other people.
so the first way that we did this.
we asked them how happy they were, and then we gave them an envelope.
so we gave some examples of what you could spend it on.
so some people got this slip of paper and five dollars.
we let them go about their day.
they did whatever they wanted to do.
we found out that they did in fact spend it in the way that we asked them to.
what did they spend it on?
well these are college undergrads, so a lot of what they spent it on for themselves were things like earrings and makeup.
one woman said she bought a stuffed animal for her niece.
so if you give undergraduates five dollars, it looks like coffee to them and they run over to starbucks and spend it as fast as they can.
what did we find when we called them back at the end of the day?
people who spent money on other people got happier.
and the other thing we saw is the amount of money doesn't matter that much.
so people thought that 20 dollars would be way better than five dollars.
what really matters is that you spent it on somebody else rather than on yourself.
we see this again and again when we give people money to spend on other people instead of on themselves.
we wanted to see if this holds true everywhere in the world or just among wealthy countries.
how happy did it make you?"
or in uganda, "name the last time you spent money on yourself or other people and describe that."
and then we asked them how happy they are again.
this is a woman from canada.
compare that to this woman from uganda.
what we see again though is that the specific way that you spend on other people isn't nearly as important as the fact that you spend on other people in order to make yourself happy, which is really quite important.
so you don't have to do amazing things with your money to make yourself happy.
we also wanted to go even broader and look at every country in the world if we could to see what the relationship is between money and happiness.
and we can see what the relationship is between those two things.
so in almost every country in the world where we have this data, people who give money to charity are happier people that people who don't give money to charity.
i know you're all looking at that red country in the middle.
so almost everywhere we look we see that giving money away makes you happier than keeping it for yourself.
what about your work life, which is where we spend all the rest of our time when we're not with the people we know.
they work in teams; they go out and sell to doctors and try to get them to buy drugs.
so we can look and see how well they sell things as a function of being a member of a team.
buy them something as a gift or a present and give it to them.
and one way to think about it is for every 15 euro you give people for themselves, they put it in their pocket, they don't do anything different than they did before.
but when you give them 15 euro to spend on their teammates, they do so much better on their teams that you actually get a huge win on investing this kind of money.
and we did the exact same thing as before.
it's in fact, that you should stop thinking about which product to buy for yourself and try giving some of it to other people instead.
you and i can go on and buy it for them.
the teacher writes you a thank you note.
which i made people make in the auditorium, was heard around the world.
he put on it the water plant, and which houses are there, which houses have been connected to the water.
you can burrow down by a particular type of spending, or you can go through all the different regions and compare them.
how can you use this stuff?
it allows you to set your own criteria for what sort of things you want to look at.
i was not the only person editing the open street map.
and it is for those in the future to envy us our joy."
it tells the story of sputnik, and the story of what happened to america as a result.
but it also shows how we can turn what appears at first to be a bad situation, into something that was overall very good for america.
joshua walters: on being just crazy enough
maybe you thought that was scary, but actually there's no amount of drugs you can take that can get you as high as if you think you're jesus christ.
the first half of high school was the struggle of the manic episode, and the second half was the overmedications of these drugs, where i was sleeping through high school.
when i got out i had a choice.
everyone is just a little bit mad.
how much depends on where you fall in the spectrum.
do you think you could do it?
so what do we make of that?
do you even need a brain at all just to synchronize?
do you need to be alive?
let me be quiet for a second because this is so gorgeous.
birds try to stay about three or four body lengths apart.
but except for that difference, the rules are the same for both.
and you see that in nature.
each is scattering away at random to try to save its scales or feathers.
you might wonder what exactly is the advantage to being in a swarm, so you can think of several.
information can be sent over half a kilometer away in a very short time through this mechanism.
see if you can see those waves propagating through the swarm.
we would like to be able to understand better.
how do the rules give rise to the patterns?
there is one case that we have begun to understand better, and it's the case of fireflies.
they each do their own thing, flashing on and off, paying no attention to their neighbors.
you can see it every night along the river banks.
in a second i'm going to show you a slow motion of a single firefly so that you can get a sense.
you can even be just a single cell.
what i have here are two empty water bottles.
i also want to wind this one up a bit.
my wife pointed out to me that it will work better if i put both on at the same time because otherwise the whole thing will tip over.
and a clear case of that, was something that happened in london in the year 2000.
and then show me what it was like when the bridge started to go.
and it seemed obvious to me that it was probably the number of people on it.
think of the people as being like metronomes.
and especially if we start to walk like those people did, right?
and so let me show you now the footage of the bridge.
but how could the crowd become synchronized?
if you try and put one foot in front of another, it's moving your feet away from under you.
so already, the simulator is making me walk in exactly the same way as our witnesses walked on the real bridge.
and the only way you can walk comfortably is by getting in step.
but i hope that you'll go outside and see the world in a new way, to see all the amazing synchrony around us.
and he also understood that that foundation was crumbling, literally crumbling.
so, let me show you a picture of one form of diversity.
if i wanted to show you a picture of all the dog breeds in the world, and i put 30 or 40 of them on a slide, it would take about 10 slides because there about 400 breeds of dogs in the world.
and i want to give you an example of that.
i used to have a list of these extinct apples, and when i would go out and give a presentation, i would pass the list out in the audience.
these apples come from your ancestors, and your ancestors gave them the greatest honor they could give them.
the good news is a third of you didn't hold up your hand.
so, i want to tell you that the piece of the good news is that the fowler apple is still out there.
and there's an old book back here, and i want to read a piece from it.
and then he has to go even further.
it sounds like it was written by an old school teacher of mine.
i get this question all the time.
one thing is that there is no such thing as a best one.
in short, the answer is that in the future, in many countries, the coldest growing seasons are going to be hotter than anything those crops have seen in the past.
and you can see that there's some difference between one growing season and another.
now, you may say that 20 years is a long way off.
we have two rolls of the dice to get this right.
we have to get climate-ready crops in the field, and we have to do that rather quickly.
and i'm not talking about losing diversity in the same way that you lose your car keys.
i'm talking about losing it in the same way that we lost the dinosaurs: actually losing it, never to be seen again.
so we needed a really safe place, and we went quite far north to find it.
some of the happiest days of my life have been spent ...
if you were to walk into one of these rooms, you would see this.
and if anything happens, then they can come back and get it.
i can't look you in the eyes and tell you that i have a simple solution for that, but i can look you in the eyes and tell you that we can't solve any of those problems if we don't have crop diversity.
there are a lot of people who would love to have this diversity exist just for the existence value of it.
we need to put it into good seed banks that can offer those seeds to researchers in the future.
and we need to support it financially.
so we need to be thinking a little bit in those terms.
this message is given as a public service.
this is a very serious research, that you should read the underline.
how to take care in five easy steps: first of all, you can use natural ventilation.
you should stay cool with the appropriate clothing.
another benefit of wi-fi, we learned yesterday about the benefits of wi-fi.
government, so you can see that your tax man is working for good causes.
and i just want to show you that i'm not just preaching, but i also practice.
we stand a very big chance of losing our ability to inspire our youth to go out and continue this very important thing that we as a species have always done.
they need to look forward to exploration; they need to look forward to colonization; they need to look forward to breakthroughs.
we need to inspire them, because they need to lead us and help us survive in the future.
we have real specific instructions here not to talk about politics.
what they look at is the most important thing.
aviation week asked me to make a list of who i thought were the movers and shakers of the first 100 years of aviation.
and i wrote them down and i found out later that every one of them was a little kid in that wonderful renaissance of aviation.
and this was at a time when mars was a hell of a lot more interesting than it is now.
if you look at what happened -- this little black line is as fast as man ever flew, and the red line is top-of-the-line military fighters and the blue line is commercial air transport.
you notice here's a big jump when i was a little kid -- and i think that had something to do with giving me the courage to go out and try something that other people weren't having the courage to try.
and then i went in and i had a lot of fun building airplanes that people could build in their garages.
you can put that statement on all kinds of different technologies.
and i had to fly three in mojave with my little group of a couple dozen people in order to get to a total of five, which was the number the same year back in 1961.
this is a picture here taken from spaceshipone.
this is a picture here taken from orbit.
our goal is to make it so that you can see this picture and really enjoy that.
and i think i want to talk a little bit about why we had the courage to go out and try that as a small company.
and that real easy thing to do, which is a swing around the moon so you have this cool view.
and that will be really cool.
these people are taking money and putting it in an interesting area, and i think it's a lot better than they put it in an area of a better cell phone or something -- but they're putting it in very -- areas and this will lead us into this kind of capability, and it will lead us into the next really big thing and it will allow us to explore.
and i think eventually it will allow us to colonize and to keep us from going extinct.
you can buy it in russia.
they are also offering a trip to go on this whip around the moon, like apollo 8 was done.
but starting back in june of 2004, when i showed that a little group out there actually can do it, can get a start with it, everything changed after that time.
so why should we care about blood vessels?
end to end, that would form a line that would circle the earth twice.
so the body has the ability to regulate the amount of blood vessels that are present at any given time.
but what we now know is that for a number of diseases, there are defects in the system where the body can't prune back extra blood vessels or can't grow enough new ones in the right place at the right time.
and this turns out to be one of our most important defense mechanisms against cancer.
we had it painted on top of the cancer three times a week.
and over the course of six months, he experienced a complete remission.
but the real question is: how well do these work in practice?
this could help healthy people as well as people who've already beaten cancer once or twice and want to find a way to keep it from coming back.
so let me show you what happens when we put in an extract from red grapes.
check out this ad from blue cross blue shield of minnesota.
so the question is: can we shrink fat by cutting off its blood supply?
and the bottom curve is the weight of a normal mouse.
for anyone out here who has cancer, what would you recommend?
and this is one of the themes that i'm talking about is we can empower ourselves to do the things that doctors can't do for us, which is to use knowledge and take action.
and if mother nature has given us some clues, we think that there might be a new future in the value of how we eat.
and what we eat is really our chemotherapy three times a day.
i thought this was a great assignment.
and so here is what i came up with.
i came up with this letter.
a puzzle is a problem that is fun to solve and has a right answer.
it might take a long time.
it goes back as long as there is written history.
and that turns into the title of my first book, "inversions."
each letter here is one of these digits.
and so i did this for him.
now how would you do it interactively?
and so i think a lot about interaction.
if you could pick up the white area, it would look like the figure on the bottom.
the goal here is to take the pieces on the left and make them so they look like the shape on the right.
and this follows the rules i just said: any black area that is surrounded by white can be picked up.
but that is also true of any white area.
so, here we got the white area in the middle, and you can pick it up.
here is another thing you can do.
the goal is to get the red car out.
the first move is going to be what?
you're going to move the blue one up in order to get the lavender one to the right.
i wanted to make a sequel.
and you have to choose pieces that overlap on the edge.
she could easily be up here giving a talk about her work.
a lot of people do sudoku.
and what does this add up to?
here is what we see coming.
this is your first time playing my game.
and we have people all over the world doing that now.
what i want to talk about today is this particular cell, or grouping of cells, that is in each and every one of us.
and i want to call it the girl cell.
and it is essential to balance, to wisdom and to actually the future of all of us.
i think the whole world has essentially been brought up not to be a girl.
how do we bring up boys?
what does it mean to be a boy?
to be a boy really means not to be a girl.
to be a man means not to be a girl.
to be a woman means not to be a girl.
to be strong means not to be a girl.
to be a leader means not to be a girl.
i actually think that being a girl is so powerful that we've had to train everyone not to be that.
i have spent a lot of time there in the last three years.
i feel up to that point i had seen a lot in the world, a lot of violence.
when i spent my first weeks at panzi hospital i sat with women who sat and lined up every day to tell me their stories.
listening to the story of 80-year-old women who were tied to chains and circled, and where groups of men would come and rape them periodically, all in the name of economic exploitation to steal the minerals so the west can have it and profit from them.
but what happened for me is that that shattering actually emboldened me in a way i have never been emboldened.
i want to say that i think the powers that be know that empire-building is actually -- that feelings get in the way of empire-building.
and even in the moment he didn't want to be reminded of what he was doing.
and i think we have taught men to be secure when they are insecure, to pretend they know things when they don't know things, or why would we be where we are?
to pretend they're not a mess when they are a mess.
on my way here on the airplane, i was walking up and down the aisle of the plane.
and all these men, literally at least 10 men, were in their little seats watching chick flicks.
i've seen girls who were beaten by their mothers and brothers and fathers and uncles.
i've seen that we cut girls and we control them and we keep them illiterate, or we make them feel bad about being too smart.
we make them feel guilty for being smart.
and in many places they are worth less than goats and cows.
but i also want to talk about the fact that if one in eight people on the planet are girls between the ages of 10 to 24, they are they key, really, in the developing world, as well as in the whole world, to the future of humanity.
i want to change the verb.
i want us all to change the verb.
if we teach girls to change the verb we will actually enforce the girl inside us and the girl inside them.
and i have to now share a few stories of girls i've seen across the planet who have engaged their girl, who have taken on their girl in spite of all the circumstances around them.
there is a teenage girl who just recently went out and knew that she needed 56 stars tattooed on the right side of her face.
there is a girl, julia butterfly hill, who lived for a year in a tree because she wanted to protect the wild oaks.
there is a girl who i met 14 years ago in afghanistan who i have adopted as my daughter because her mother was killed.
and that video became the video that went out all over the world after 9/11 to show what was going on in afghanistan.
and she knew she risked death and she was literally gunned down and rolled over by that tank.
and i want to talk about a girl that i just met recently in bukavu, who was impregnated by her rapist.
and she was holding her baby.
and i asked her if she loved her baby.
how could i not love my baby?
there is a girl named dorcas, and i just met her in kenya.
dorcas is 15 years old, and she was trained in self-defense.
a few months ago she was picked up on the street by three older men.
and she made a decision as many women do across this planet, that what was done to her would not be enforced and done to other women and girls.
and in that time she saved many girls.
and when we met her we asked her what we could do for her, and she said, "well, if you got me a jeep i could get around a lot faster."
and in the years that agnes has had the house, she has changed the situation there.
and there was a young girl named jaclyn.
and jaclyn overheard her father talking to an old man about how he was about to sell her for the cows.
and she knew that meant she would be cut.
she knew she would have to marry that old man, and she was 14.
she imagined her father killing her on one hand, and mama agnes greeting her, with the hope that she would greet her when she got to the house.
and when she got to the house she was greeted.
she went to school and she found her voice, and she found her identity, and she found her heart.
then, her time was ready when she had to go back to talk to her father about the reconciliation, after a year.
in that hut, we walked in, and her father and his four wives were sitting there, and her sisters who had just returned because they had all fled when she had fled, and her primary mother, who had been beaten in standing up for her with the elders.
when her father saw her and saw who she had become, in her full girl self, he threw his arms around her and broke down crying.
and i give you my word, here and now, that we will not cut your sisters either."
and what she said to him was, "you were willing to sell me for four cows, and a calf and some blankets.
but i promise you, now that i will be educated i will always take care of you, and i will come back and i will build you a house.
and i will be in your corner for the rest of your life."
and that is the power of transformation.
i want to close today with a new piece from my book.
and i want to do it tonight for the girl in everybody here.
and i want to do it for sunitha.
and it happened because i met a girl in watts, l.a.
i know when a storm is coming.
i love that i do not take things lightly.
i am connected to everything and everyone.
there is a particular way of knowing.
i know we have pushed the earth too far.
i know that one kiss could take away all my decision-making ability.
why would you want to shut me down or turn me off?
i love, hear me, i love that i can feel the feelings inside you, even if they stop my life, even if they break my heart, even if they take me off track, they make me responsible.
can you say it with me?
so he realized he had a set whose number of elements was larger than infinity.
and when he came out of the sanitarium, he was convinced that he had been put on earth to found transfinite set theory because the largest set of infinity would be god himself.
he was a very religious man.
and so he came up with this beautiful curve.
and there's no particular reason why we have to start with this seed shape; we can use any seed shape we like.
so these all have the property of self-similarity: the part looks like the whole.
and that worked for a hundred years.
your body is covered with fractals.
so i got a fulbright scholarship to just travel around africa for a year asking people why they were building fractals, which is a great job if you can get it.
but he was really cool about it, and he took me up there, and we talked about fractals.
and as you go through the path, you have to get more and more polite.
well, i noticed that line is about where the only square building in the village is at.
and when she dies, they have a ceremony where they break this stack called the zalanga and her soul goes off to eternity.
but that turns out not to be true.
it is not the same pattern at two different scales.
and his answer was very interesting.
but it takes a lot of time, and it takes a lot of straw because they're really tight."
and i started explaining why i was there in africa, and they got very excited when they saw the cantor set.
i think i can help you out here."
and the most interesting thing i found out about it was historical.
so let me end with just a few words about applications that we've found for this.
so if we want to find a better way of doing that kind of work, we need look only no farther than africa to find these robust self-organizing algorithms.
the last 50 years have seen a revolution in what it means to be a family.
eight in 10 say the family they have today is as strong or stronger than the family they grew up in.
that their parents be less tired and less stressed.
so how can we change this dynamic?
i was trying to figure out, what do happy families do right and what can i learn from them to make my family happier?
i want to tell you about one family that i met, and why i think they offer clues.
in agile, workers are organized into small groups and do things in very short spans of time.
when my wife and i adopted these family meetings and other techniques into the lives of our then-five-year-old twin daughters, it was the biggest single change we made since our daughters were born.
and these meetings had this effect while taking under 20 minutes.
so what is agile, and why can it help with something that seems so different, like families?
they do things in small chunks.
nothing takes longer than two weeks.
but the real change didn't come until we had these family meetings.
and suddenly the most amazing things started coming out of our daughters' mouths.
getting over our fear of riding bikes.
but the most surprising part was when we turned to, what are we going to work on in the week ahead?
so they would come up with all these ideas.
you know, greet five visitors at the door this week, get an extra 10 minutes of reading before bed.
it felt like we were kind of laying these underground cables that wouldn't light up their world for many years to come.
i think the time is right for an agile family manifesto.
what's great about the agile system is you build in a system of change so that you can react to what's happening to you in real time.
parents can learn a lot from that.
we have to break parents out of this straitjacket that the only ideas we can try at home are ones that come from shrinks or self-help gurus or other family experts.
everybody knows that having family dinner with your children is good for the kids.
you can take that 10 minutes and move it to any part of the day and have the same benefit.
my wife and i actually moved where we sit for difficult conversations because i was sitting above in the power position.
the point is there are all these new ideas out there.
so one of my daughters threw out, you get five minutes of overreacting time all week.
so we kind of liked that.
but then her sister started working the system.
spend the time however you want.
just as i was leaving to come here tonight, one of my daughters started screaming.
so how do you do that?
and we ended up with 10 statements.
again, research shows that parents should spend less time worrying about what they do wrong and more time focusing on what they do right, worry less about the bad times and build up the good times.
this family mission statement is a great way to identify what it is that you do right.
a few weeks later, we got a call from the school.
suddenly we had a way into the conversation.
another great way to tell your story is to tell your children where they came from.
do you know where your parents went to high school?
if you give children this happy narrative, you give them the tools to make themselves happier.
each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way."
but as i began working on this project, i began changing my mind.
in fact, he asked to be buried in that ravine where he thought it was hidden.
greatness is not a matter of circumstance.
in the end, this may be the greatest lesson of all.
i'm here to show you how something you can't see can be so much fun to look at.
and it could be things that need to be self-cleaning as well.
so imagine how something like this could help revolutionize your field of work.
and the basic idea is that there's this law of attraction, and your thoughts have this vibrating energy that goes out into the universe and then you attract good things to happen to you.
i want to try to share just a little bit of that with you in this presentation.
if you were an engineer and i told you that you had to build an automobile, but it had to start off to be this big, then it had to grow to be full size and had to work every step along the way.
or think about the fact that if you build an automobile, i'll tell you that you also -- inside it -- have to put a factory that allows you to make another automobile.
and this is really important when you begin to look at animals.
how can you make sense of this?
and they asked us this question.
we got some of the best mathematicians in the world from princeton to work on this problem.
it goes up to four meters per second when it runs.
well, we wanted to see if they allowed the animals to have greater stability and maneuverability.
the animal ran over it and it didn't even slow down!
we have one here and notice its position.
one of the animals is going to be running on the level, and the other one's going to be running up a wall.
how many think the one on the left is running up the wall?
the one on the right was going up the hill.
they do this with their toes.
pick a foot and try to watch a toe, and see if you can see what the animal's doing.
it can do this in 14 milliseconds.
the animal does not use that.
the smallest branch of the hairs looks like spatulae, and an animal like that has one billion of these nano-size split ends, to get very close to the surface.
we were fortunate to work with another group at stanford that built us a special manned sensor, that we were able to measure the force of an individual hair.
do they do it by friction?
do they do it by electrostatics?
do they do it by interlocking?
they stick on in a vacuum.
how do they do it then?
that tiny force is sufficient to allow them to do that because it's added up so many times with these small structures.
i think you can see it already.
we saw david kelly is at the beginning of that with his fish.
and the problem is this: women are not making it to the top of any profession anywhere in the world.
the numbers tell the story quite clearly.
the numbers have not moved since 2002 and are going in the wrong direction.
a recent study in the u.s.
or maybe you're the only one who had to go to the bathroom."
how do we change these numbers at the top?
how do we make this different?
today i want to focus on what we can do as individuals.
what are the messages we tell the women who work with and for us?
now, at the outset, i want to be very clear that this speech comes with no judgments.
my talk today is about what the messages are if you do want to stay in the workforce, and i think there are three.
and everyone kind of sat at the table.
i wish i could do that now.
the three of us take this class together.
i read all the books in english and go to most of the lectures.
my brother is kind of busy.
i wish the answer were easy.
i wish i could tell that to my daughter.
but that one word made a really big difference.
the bad news was that everyone liked howard.
you want to work for him.
you want to spend the day fishing with him.
we have to tell our daughters and our colleagues, we have to tell ourselves to believe we got the a, to reach for the promotion, to sit at the table, and we have to do it in a world where, for them, there are sacrifices they will make for that, even though for their brothers, there are not.
i gave this talk at facebook not so long ago to about 100 employees, and a couple hours later, there was a young woman who works there sitting outside my little desk, and she wanted to talk to me.
i learned that i need to keep my hand up."
and i had my hand up with lots of other people, and you took two more questions.
and i put my hand down, and i noticed all the women put their hand down, and then you took more questions, only from the men."
if a woman and a man work full-time and have a child, the woman does twice the amount of housework the man does, and the woman does three times the amount of childcare the man does.
who do you think drops out when someone needs to be home more?
the causes of this are really complicated, and i don't have time to go into them.
i think the cause is more complicated.
i know men that stay home and work in the home to support wives with careers, and it's hard.
and she starts thinking about having a child, and from the moment she starts thinking about having a child, she starts thinking about making room for that child.
one woman came to see me about this, and i kind of looked at her -- she looked a little young.
but the point is that what happens once you start kind of quietly leaning back?
keep your foot on the gas pedal, until the very day you need to leave to take a break for a child -- and then make your decisions.
i think a world that was run where half of our countries and half of our companies were run by women, would be a better world.
i think it would be a better world.
i want my son to have a choice to contribute fully in the workforce or at home, and i want my daughter to have the choice to not just succeed, but to be liked for her accomplishments.
i remember when i was little my mom asked me, would you like to play the violin or the piano?
i looked at that giant monster and said to myself -- i am not going to lock myself on that bench the whole day.
the best of all is that if i don't want to practice, i can hide it.
even from the same maker or based on the same model.
at first i thought i was just going to be here to perform, but unexpectedly, i learned and enjoyed much more.
but ... although some of them were quite up there for me.
but actually, the most impressive thing to me is that ... well, actually, i would also like to stand this for all children is to say, thank you, to all adults for actually caring for us a lot and to make our future world much better.
so i want to talk about that as an opportunity that we really have failed to engage with very well in this country and, in fact, worldwide.
now behavior change is something that is a long-standing problem in medicine.
it goes all the way back to aristotle.
but they have really taken this problem of behavior change and solved it.
they had a big patient population.
they divided them up into two groups.
they told them that their teeth were going to fall out.
now they measured one other variable.
so fear showed up as not really the driver.
it was the sense of efficacy.
and this is a great example of how we haven't learned that lesson at all.
they last for about five miles, in which case we put our foot back on the pedal.
who among us would actually say that people read this?
and who among us would actually say that people who do try to read this actually get anything out of it?
there is no good faith in this.
so this is a different approach.
so let me just walk through this quickly.
you can understand exactly what the benefits are.
and so i was thinking about, what's an opportunity that i could have to help people understand information?
blood test results are this great source of information.
and then we do two other very important things that kind of help fill in this feedback loop: we help people understand in a little more detail what these values are and what they might indicate.
so we thought the patient might actually want to know the context as well.
and so we spent a good deal of our time indicating that.
now this is not a problem of resources; this is a problem of incentives.
so i want to just offer four questions that every patient should ask, because i don't actually expect people to start developing these lab test reports.
so i want to wind up by just showing that people have the capacity to understand this information.
you do not need to have the education level of people in this room.
ordinary people are capable of understanding this information, if we only go to the effort of presenting it to them in a form that they can engage with.
it works totally different from the way we talk about behavior in medicine today.
i want to say a word for nature because we haven't talked that much about it the last couple days.
i want to say a word for the soil and the bees and the plants and the animals, and tell you about a tool, a very simple tool that i have found.
let me tell you where i got it.
and that's when i got the idea, which was, "well, what would happen if we kind of looked at us from this point of view of these other species who are working on us?"
so i started looking at things this way and wrote a whole book about it called "the botany of desire."
and i realized that in the same way you can look at a flower and deduce all sorts of interesting things about the taste and the desires of bees -- that they like sweetness, that they like this color and not that color, that they like symmetry -- what could we find out about ourselves by doing the same thing?
get us to do things that leads to the support and perpetuation of the biota, rather than its destruction?
and it's kind of natural that we would think it was the best tool.
and that's really what i do as a writer, as a storyteller, is try to make people feel what we know and tell stories that actually help us think ecologically.
and you will see, the amount of corn planted this year will be up dramatically from last year and there will be that much more habitat because we've decided ethanol is going to help us.
let me take you to a very different kind of farm.
i went looking for a farm where these ideas about looking at things from the species' point of view are actually implemented, and i found it in a man.
and i spent a week as an apprentice on his farm, and i took away from this some of the most hopeful news about our relationship to nature that i've ever come across in 25 years of writing about nature.
they then move out to the next one, and in the course of just a few weeks, the grass just enters this blaze of growth.
well, look how much food you can produce on 100 acres if you do this kind of ...
but look at it from the point of view of the grass, now.
what happens to the grass when you do this?
this is how soil is created.
there are a lot of farmers doing this today.
and what it tells you is that if you begin to take account of other species, take account of the soil, that even with nothing more than this perspectival idea -- because there is no technology involved here except for those fences, which are so cheap they could be all over africa in no time -- that we can take the food we need from the earth and actually heal the earth in the process.
when we really begin to feel darwin's insights in our bones, the things we can do with nothing more than these ideas are something to be very hopeful about.
we spoke to you last several years ago.
and before i get started today, since many of you are wondering, i just wanted to get it out of the way.
now i hope all of you feel better.
do you know what this might be?
does anyone know what that is?
i didn't really realize what it was when i first saw it.
but this is what helped me see it.
this is what we run at the office, that actually runs real time.
but here you can see around the world how people are using google.
and europe, which is right now in the middle of the day, is going really strong with a whole wide variety of languages.
so this is some of the challenge that we have here, is you can see that it's actually kind of hard to get the -- there we go.
this is how we have to move the bits around to actually get the people the answers to their questions.
now what i would like to do is just to show you what one second of this activity would look like.
this is what one second looks like.
and this is what we spend a lot of our time doing, is just making sure that we can keep up with this kind of traffic load.
you can see that it got started right here.
and i just wanted to play it for you.
as a part of -- you know, part of what we want to do to grow our company is to have more searches.
and what that means is we want to have more people who are healthy and educated.
this is one of our engineers.
so this is what he built.
and these are all of his friends.
but it's just the kind of thing that we just try out for fun and see where it goes.
and i think many other things in the world also have come out of this.
and in news' case, you know, they had a couple of people working on it for a while, and then more and more people started using it, and then we put it out on the internet, and more and more people started using it.
but then we had a problem because then we had over 100 projects.
and i don't know about all of you, but i have trouble keeping 100 things in my head at once.
and we found that if we just wrote all of them down and ordered them -- and these are kind of made up.
we would never do such a crazy thing, but -- in any case, we found if we just basically wrote them all down and ordered them, that most people would actually agree what the ordering should be.
and this was kind of a surprise to me, but we found that as long as you keep the 100 things in your head, which you did by writing them down, that you could do a pretty good job deciding what to do and where to put your resources.
how many of you use the deskbar?
and as a result, we were able to build some software that also lets us manage a meeting, so when you walk into a meeting room now, it lists all the meetings that are happening, you can very easily take notes, and they just get emailed automatically to all the people that were present in the meeting.
and simple things like this can really make a big difference.
i just wanted to show quickly.
it makes it a really fun place to work.
you want it to be consistent.
and i think this is really important for us, because it makes the internet work better.
and the idea behind this is to do the perfect job doing search, you really have to be smart.
but finding things is tricky, and so you really want intelligence.
and so that's something we work on, and we even have some people who are excited enough and crazy enough to work on it now, and that's really their goal.
and so i just wanted to give a funny example of this.
he was just kind of writing about his life.
i wanted to end just by saying that there's a couple things that really make me excited to be involved with google, and one of those is that we're able to make money largely through advertising, and one of the benefits that i didn't expect from that was that we're able to serve everyone in the world without worrying about, you know, places that don't have as much money.
and so in our search results, we never accept payment for our search results.
we accept payment for advertising, and we mark it as such.
and i think decisions we're able to make like that have a tremendous impact on the world, and it makes me really proud to be involved with google.
and it looks like this right now.
a lot of people are very happy with facebook.
i like it quite a lot.
this sort of loss of free will that occurs in games can be frightening, so with each dynamic, i'm going to give three examples: one that shows how this is already being used in the real world, so you can sort of rationalize it a little bit; one that shows it in what we consider a conventional game -- i think everything is a game, but this is sort of more of a what you would think is a game played on a board or on a computer screen, and then one how this can be used for good, so we can see that these forces can really be very powerful.
so i just recently dropped out of princeton and actually ended up for the first time in a bar, and i saw these happy hour things all over the place, right.
come here at a certain time, get your drinks half off.
to win, all you have to do is show up at the right place at the right time.
you won't do anything else with the rest of your day.
but this could also be used for good.
and this is used in games as well.
so school is a game, and there have been lots of experimentations on how we do this properly.
like why have games that you can lose?
why go from an a to an f or a b to a c?
the third one i want to talk about quickly is the progression dynamic, where you have to sort of make progress, you have to move through different steps in a very granular fashion.
we will find a way to move that blue line all the way to the right edge of the screen.
and so people work very hard to level-up.
it can also be used in very compelling ways for good.
but it became so powerful that there was actually a cabal, a group of people, the top seven on the leader board, who would work together to make sure they maintained that position.
and they actually had to end up shutting down the leader board because while it was effective, it was so powerful that it stopped sourcing the best stories and started having people work to maintain their leadership.
so we have to use this one carefully.
but it can also be used to find real things.
now this rather old photo up there is actually the first project i was ever hired to do, something like 25 years ago.
and i'd like to suggest that if we take a different view of design, and focus less on the object and more on design thinking as an approach, that we actually might see the result in a bigger impact.
his greatest creation runs actually right through here in oxford.
and as a kid i grew up very close to here, and one of my favorite things to do was to cycle along by the side of the railway waiting for the great big express trains to roar past.
great western that he built to take care of the second half of that journey.
but i do think that perhaps design is getting big again.
and as we see this reemergence of design thinking and we see it beginning to tackle new kinds of problems, there are some basic ideas that i think we can observe that are useful.
and i'd like to talk about some of those just for the next few minutes.
it's often about understanding culture and context before we even know where to start to have ideas.
so when a team was working on a new vision screening program in india, they wanted to understand what the aspirations and motivations were of these school children to understand how they might play a role in screening their parents.
instead of starting with technology, the team started with people and culture.
instead of thinking about what to build, building in order to think.
and the faster we do that, the faster our ideas evolve.
by the time he wrote his third report, he confessed that he had failed and instead had created a society of welfare consumers.
by doing this they brought the time that they were away from patients down from 40 minutes to 12 minutes, on average.
so these are just some of the kind of basic ideas around design thinking and some of the new kinds of projects that they're being applied to.
but before we go through that process of divergence, there is actually quite an important first step.
but what are the kinds of questions that we might ask today?
so these are some that we've been asked to think about recently.
some of those ideas are just getting launched into the market.
so for me, this project shows kind of how far we can go from some of those sort of small things that i was working on at the beginning of my career.
what kinds of questions do we think design thinking could be used to tackle?
and the list looked something like this a little while ago.
and of course you can search to find the questions that you're interested in by using the same hash code.
and the first step is to start asking the right questions.
on my first day, i went to a restaurant, and i ordered a cup of green tea with sugar.
but i really like my tea sweet."
the kids got to choose which pile of anagrams they would like to do, and they even got to choose which marker they would write their answers with.
when the second group of children came in, they were brought to the same room, shown the same anagrams, but this time miss smith told them which anagrams to do and which markers to write their answers with.
now when the third group came in, they were told that their anagrams and their markers had been chosen by their mothers.
with this procedure, we were able to ensure that the kids across the three groups all did the same activity, making it easier for us to compare performance.
anglo-americans, they did two and a half times more anagrams when they got to choose them, as compared to when it was chosen for them by miss smith or their mothers.
in contrast, asian-american children performed best when they believed their mothers had made the choice, second best when they chose for themselves, and least well when it had been chosen by miss smith.
the assumption then that we do best when the individual self chooses only holds when that self is clearly divided from others.
it requires that everyone treat choice as a private and self-defining act.
you will surely find the perfect match.
they were flooded with choice before they could protest that they didn't know how to swim.
i am used to no choice."
we do not need everything that is there."
they were never given a chance to learn how to react."
they practice this from such an early age that they've come to believe that everyone must be born with this ability.
in fact, though all humans share a basic need and desire for choice, we don't all see choice in the same places or to the same extent.
but it is not only other people in other places that are feeling the pressure of ever-increasing choice.
they had all suffered the same tragedy.
but there was a big difference.
in france, the doctors decided whether and when the life support would be removed, while in the united states, the final decision rested with the parents.
how did they get me to do that?"
but when the american parents were asked if they would rather have had the doctors make the decision, they all said, "no."
they could not imagine turning that choice over to another, even though having made that choice made them feel trapped, guilty, angry.
these parents could not contemplate giving up the choice, because to do so would have gone contrary to everything they had been taught and everything they had come to believe about the power and purpose of choice.
but when you take a close look, you start to see the holes, and you start to see that the story can be told in many other ways.
but the history books and the daily news tell us it doesn't always work out that way.
when it comes to choice, we have far more to gain than to lose by engaging in the many translations of the narratives.
instead of replacing one story with another, we can learn from and revel in the many versions that exist and the many that have yet to be written.
and so one time i was in a beauty salon, and i was trying to decide between two very light shades of pink.
and the other one was called "adorable."
the other lady tells me to wear "adorable."
and what i wondered was whether they were being affected by the name or the content of the color, so i decided to do a little experiment.
at which point you start to wonder who the trick's really played on.
so as far as i can tell, a rose by any other name probably does look different and maybe even smells different.
well, the three big problems have in common that they are man-made problems but they are controlled by natural forces.
this should make us feel very, terribly awful as much as it should make us feel hopeful, because if we have the power to create these problems, we may as well have the power to remediate these problems.
so i quit my dream job, and i moved to new orleans, and i kept on studying how the oil spill was happening.
currently, what they were doing is that they were using these small fishing boats, and they were cleaning clean lines in an ocean of dirt.
and so, i thought, what about if we just take the rudder from the back of the boat to the front, would we have better control?
then i was so happy that i kept playing with the robot, and so you see the robot has a front rudder here.
so  thank you very much.
and this is exactly what we're looking [for] if we want to pull something long and heavy.
so this is happening in the netherlands.
we tried in the water without any skin or ballast just to see how it works.
and then we mounted a camera for controlling it, but quickly we saw that we would need a lot more weight at the bottom, so we had to take it back to the lab, and then we built a skin around it, we put batteries, remote controllers, and then we put it in the water and then we let it go in the water and see how well it would work, so let some rope out, and hope it's going to work, and it worked okay, but we still have a long way.
we went from a back rudder to a front rudder to two rudders to multiple rudders to the whole boat changing shape, and the more we are moving forward, and the more the design looks simple and cute.
so the first thing as i show you in the video is that we may be able to control the trajectory of a sailing boat better, or we may be able to never be in irons, so never facing the wind, we always can catch the wind from both sides.
this is how most work today.
if we have the courage to understand or accept that this actually how the world really works, and this is the order of priority that we need to choose, then it makes obvious why we need to choose open hardware for developing environmental technology, because we need to share information.
our hope is that we can use open hardware technology to better understand and protect our oceans.
i think right now the computers will be at the top and everything will be kind of going down and stuff.
let me give you an example of this.
by the way, this is about when i enter the picture.
but they were onto something and they got better at it.
it doesn't work out too well, and so we actually go back to the well and start all over again, as the people in new york and l.a.
would you like if i used the machine?
and you can imagine that the air force became a pretty good salesman.
and then it would be too late to act.
we cannot afford to take that chance.
this is a really good example of that.
this had the first pointing device.
you saw how huge it was, and to give you a sense for this -- because we've talked a lot about moore's law and making things small at this conference, so let's talk about making things large.
dec kind of reduces all this and makes the first mini-computer.
dec knew a good thing about wasting time.
then take it and put it right up against the screen of your own television set, and rub it out from the center to the corners, like this.
come on into the secret lab.
it turns out there was a lot to learn about how this new medium worked.
here he is talking from the 1960s.
but all that was about to change.
people were leaving to go back to the land.
i think it was that interaction that led to personal computing.
they saw these tools that were controlled by the establishment as ones that could actually be liberated and put to use by these communities that they were trying to build.
the stories were so compelling that i decided to write a book about them.
we asked a question about how the mind works, and we let our customers play the role of so many blind men filling out the elephant.
a few years later, we then hit on the idea of explaining to people the secret of, how do you get the content you want, the way you want it and the easy way?
the year is 1993 and he was working on a book and i was working on a video to help him kind of explain where we were all heading and how to popularize all this.
it just goes to show how tough it is to come up with the right uses of media.
he wrote a list of what the phonograph might be good for when he invented it, and kind of only one of his ideas turned out to have been the right early idea.
it turns out you have a bigger audience and more interest if you hook up with them.
and i think this is beginning to happen in the entertainment business.
how did i get started in this business?
but there were lots of other things going on in this area: it was a kind of construction zone; a lot of buildings were going up.
it looks as if these different public services work together to create some nice little compositions.
i walk to work every day or ride my scooter, and i come down and park in this little spot.
in a very short period of time, completely changed the atmosphere and character with loud voices and large bodies and such, and we had to get up and leave; it was just that uncomfortable.
but i think people have recognized the sanctity of our urban areas.
my measure of this as being an important bit of design is not so much the way that it looks, but the fact that it performs a very important social function.
but the commitment that the city has made to the public area is significant, and almost an international model.
when i was five years old i fell in love with airplanes.
so as a youngster, i tried to get close to this by drawing airplanes, constantly drawing airplanes.
so that it was something that just got into your spirit.
and i decided i had to get closer than just drawing fantasy airplanes.
if you wanted it to fly you had to learn the discipline of flying.
you had to learn about aeronautics.
you had to learn what made an airplane stay in the air.
so it had to be self-righting, and stay up without crashing.
and in so doing, i could produce a model that would fly, stay in the air.
well the act of drawing airplanes led me to, when i had the opportunity to choose a course in school, led me to sign up for aeronautical engineering.
well in 25 years i was mostly putting out pieces of this romance and not getting a lot back in because design on call doesn't always connect you with a circumstance in which you can produce things of this nature.
so after 25 years i began to feel as though i was running dry.
and i found that there were ways to duplicate the same approach that i used to use on the airplane.
i should say one more thing.
and the loose ideas had something to do with what i knew happened with people in the office, at the work place -- people who worked, and used task seating, a great many of them sitting in front of a computer all day long.
now that may not mean a lot to some of you.
so that if you sit down on my chair, whether you're five feet tall or six foot six, it always deals with your weight and transfers the amount of force required to recline in a way that you don't have to look for something to adjust.
they begin to fall off the end of your chart.
they will sit in them forever.
i had somebody on the bus out to the racetrack tell me about his sister calling him.
he came over and looked at it.
and he showed her the lever.
anyway, i felt that it was important that you didn't have to make an adjustment in order to get this kind of action.
but i felt it was too much to ask to have to adjust each individual armrest in order to get it where you wanted.
so i spent a long time.
i said i worked eight or nine years on it.
i worked a long time on figuring out how to move the arms over a much greater arc -- that is up and down -- and make them a lot easier, so that you didn't have to use a button.
or you can pull them up where you want them.
the next area that was of interest to me was the fact that reclining was a very important factor.
would everybody put their hand under their bottom and feel their tailbone?
so i knew that had to be solved, and had to be automatic.
so that part of it took a long time to work out.
but of course the most dangerous animal is the mosquito.
and the mosquito has killed more humans than wars and plague.
so why is it spreading so fast?
and the answer is this thing.
so we must be good at killing mosquitos.
the first way is that you use larvicides.
you put them into water where they breed.
the second way you can do it is actually trying to kill the insects as they fly around.
this is a picture of fogging.
having said that, actually, your best form of protection and my best form of protection is a long-sleeve shirt and a little bit of deet to go with it.
we want something that gets that population right the way down so it can't get the disease transmission.
we are going to use it in and around humans.
you want to get rid of this mosquito that spreads dengue, but you don't really want to get all the other insects.
some are important to your ecosystem.
you just want to get this one.
a single female will lay about up to 100 eggs at a time, up to about 500 in her lifetime.
they only live a few days.
bill davenhall: your health depends on where you live
my train was a heart attack.
and i suddenly realized something: that i was completely in the dark.
so, what i want to do here in the few minutes i have with you is really talk about what is the formula for life and good health.
and you know why i understand that?
do it over and over again.
and you realize that you spend it in a variety of different places.
you spend it at rest and you spend it at work.
so then i decided to leave that part of the world, and i was going to go to the mid-west.
well, i decided to be neighbors to a place called rubbertown.
and on a clear day it always looked like this, so you never saw it.
then i decided i had to get really smart, i would take this job in the west coast.
almost like the highest in the nation.
alright, this is what it looks like on a good day.
the one thing that never happens in my doctor's office: they never ask me about my place history.
they haven't asked me what kind of the quality of the drinking water that i put in my mouth or the food that i ingest into my stomach.
how many people in the room have spent the majority of their life in the white space?
how many have spent it in the red places?
they give us some sense of what's going to be our train wreck.
and you can see he's been to a few places around the united states.
and this is where he has spent most of his time.
if you really studied that you might have some clues as to what paul likes to do.
we can zoom in here, and we suddenly see that now we see where paul has really spent a majority of his time.
this is how paul did it.
he did it with his iphone.
this might be what we end up with.
this is what the physician would have in front of him and her when we enter that exam room instead of just the pink slip that said i paid at the counter.
this could be my little assessment.
it not only will be important for the physician; it will be important for the researchers that now will have huge samples to draw upon.
but it will also be useful for us.
or i could negotiate with my employer to make that decision in the best interest of myself and my company.
with that, i would like to just say that jack lord said this almost 10 years ago.
just look at that for a minute.
that was what he was talking about on that quote.
and i would say he got it right almost a decade ago.
i just wish it were more organized."
that way you could listen to cool music while you pretend to look for a job and you're really just chattin' with your pals.
i am the emperor of oranges.
i am the emperor of oranges."
when i first saw this image, 10 years ago, i actually found it very strange and beautiful at the same time.
it also is much more dynamic, so that you can see that the same form opens and closes in a very dynamic way as you move across it, because it has this quality of vector in motion built into it.
so the same space that appears to be a kind of closed volume, when seen from the other side becomes a kind of open vista.
so, every one of them is a little bit different-shaped as you move down the length of the building.
and this is one of those examples of the sets.
i work with a group of other architects.
what i'd like to do is just drag us all down into the gutter, and actually all the way down into the sewer because i want to talk about diarrhea.
you actually see a great potential, but you see a lot of people who are sort of defending their turf, and may actually be very resistant, when one tries to introduce ideas.
and a very closely related question, which is, how can we take control of this situation once we understand the answer to the first question?
the whole point is that a person who can't move can still infect many other individuals.
and you can test these ideas.
but if it could occur in just a few years, then it might be a very important way to control some of the nasty problems that we haven't been able to control.
and the reason i thought this is a really great organism to look at is that we understand why it's so harmful.
if it didn't produce a lot of this toxin, then you might find a smaller number.
that makes me worry a little bit.
but anyhow, the laughter makes me feel a little bit better.
and the idea is very simple.
the goal is to turn this around.
so, we can go to the same countries and look and see.
and i want to give you just one more example, because we've talked a little bit about malaria.
every row across here represents one of those 11 zones.
and this links up with a lot of the other ideas that have been talked about.
it may get lowered if we intervene in ways that encourage people to stay more faithful to partners, and so on.
and that will just add to the effectiveness of our control efforts.
it's not a lot different than the one you see on my patient.
if they did, how would we tell them what to do?
but at the end of the day, how do we tell these robotic arms what to do?
and we can use electrodes or antennae to pick that up and tell the arm to move.
so this is the first man that we tried it on.
and after about three months, the nerves grew in a little bit and we could get a twitch.
and this is what it looks like.
he has not learned how to do this with the chest.
there is not a learning process.
so one of the best parts of my job is working with really great patients who are also our research collaborators.
so amanda, would you please tell us how you lost your arm?
can you tell us how it worked?
then we fit her with a prosthesis.
and how did that work for you?
i was able to use my elbow and my hand simultaneously.
i could work them just by my thoughts.
so that was all very exciting.
but we want to do better.
can we get more out of it?
and i also have the hand closed and open.
so amanda, when you first started using this arm, how long did it take to use it?
so if it stopped working, i just had to take it off.
so now it's able to train with just this little piece on the back.
and it now has a hand that can do different grasps.
it goes into that mode, and then you can do up to five or six different hand grasps with this hand.
so that's exciting on where we may go with the better mechatronics, if we make them good enough to put out on the market and use in a field trial.
i want you to watch closely.
she said that when she just ran it across the table, it felt like her finger was rocking.
we're excited about where we are and a lot of things we want to do.
so for example, one is to get rid of my real estate problem and get better signals.
we want to build a better arm.
so those are just some of our goals.
we took out a whole circuit in the hotel and just about put on the fire alarm.
and one of the major problems that we have is our operating system is not giving us the proper feedback.
i had never lived alone for any period of time, and i'd never slept with sea lions snoring next to me all night.
you have to train to be able to do that.
they tell us about our world in a lot of different ways, and particularly the ocean.
when i counted penguins for the first time and tried to do a census, we just counted all the individual beaks that we could around all these islands.
and this is true of most of our living systems.
we have less than we had before, and most of them are in fairly steep decline.
and i want to just show you a little bit about why.
most important of all, i didn't know what that was the first time i heard it.
i fell in love with penguins, and it certainly has changed the rest of my life.
and you can imagine being on an island hoping you're going to see penguins, and you're in the middle of an el nino event and there are no penguins.
we usually don't, and we want to start getting the accounting system right so we can pay the real cost.
so now i want to show you that penguins are affected.
but we've been doing this now for more than a decade to learn where they go.
and some of you consider them almost part of your family.
and i just wanted to show you what happened one day when turbo brought in a friend.
and penguins are always involved in helping us or not helping us in one way or another.
you put a little piece of rice in the foot of a penguin that has a barcode, so it tells you who it is.
it walks over the pad, and you know who it is.
this is my box up here, and this is the system that works.
most important thing is: only you can change yourself, and only you can change the world and make it better, for people as well as penguins.
how many times have you been told that real, substantial change isn't possible because most people are too selfish, too stupid or too lazy to try to make a difference in their community?
you ever see one of these before?
you'll never see an ad like that because nike actually wants you to buy their shoes.
the problem with this model is that there are some amazing messages that need to be said that aren't profitable to say.
what do they have in common?
you have to save the world."
this helps me understand why a lot of people have trouble seeing themselves as leaders because it sends all the wrong messages about what leadership is about.
which leads us to the last one, which is our elections.
you add all this up together and of course people are apathetic.
quite the opposite: i actually think people are amazing and smart and that they do care.
but we can change all those things i mentioned.
we can open up city hall.
have you ever wanted to stay young a little longer and put off aging?
this is a dream of the ages.
but scientists have for a long time thought this just was never going to be possible.
but if you look in nature, you see that different kinds of animals can have really different lifespans.
now these animals are different from one another, because they have different genes.
and if they exist and you can find them, then maybe one could eventually do something about it.
and we were really optimistic that we could find something because there had been a report of a long-lived mutant.
and now i want to show what they actually look like in this movie here.
so this animal is going to live twice as long.
now get out your handkerchiefs here.
you can see the little head moving down at the bottom there.
but everything else is just lying there.
it takes this worm two days to age as much as the normal worm ages in one day.
and when i tell people about this, they tend to think of maybe an 80 or 90 year-old person who looks really good for being 90 or 80.
and you meet someone you really like, you get to know her.
and the other part is on the inside where it sends signals into the cell.
you know about a lot of them.
and that is the case in flies.
and just like any population, most of the people live to be about 70 or 80, but some live to be 90 or 100.
and these changes made the gene not act as well as the normal gene would have acted.
they have the ability to protect themselves from many kinds of damage, which we think makes them live longer.
so what about the normal worm?
but what good is this for the worm?
so you can think of foxo as being like a building superintendent.
just like we all have eyes, but some of us have blue eyes and some of us have brown eyes.
so this is really exciting to me.
and for at least one of them, there is a drug.
now i don't want you all to go out taking rapamycin.
so this may not be the perfect drug for staying young longer.
so it might be that you would just have to fine tune it very carefully to get the benefits without getting any problems.
and i think that's much better, that kind of control would be much better as a drug.
and they grow to be about this size.
and there are other examples of these kinds of animals, like turns, certain kinds of birds are like this.
so it could be that the pathways that i've been talking about, which are set to run really quickly in the worm, have a different normal set point in something like a bird, so that a bird can live a lot longer.
where and how can we draw the line?
i was also pregnant at the time.
and in my mind, i realized as a surgical pioneer that the purpose of my position of influence was surely to speak up for those who have no influence.
today we realize that there are many different types of stem cells.
and as it turns out, fat is one of the best sources of adult stem cells.
what happened to me might have been catastrophic, if not for the fact that i was in reach of good surgical access.
heart disease is the leading cause of death worldwide.
we are very happy to have the possibility to be with you in the other side of the world.
we can speak only with music.
we are very happy because we have the opportunity to have this angel in the world -- not only in our country, venezuela, but in our world.
he has given us the possibility to have dreams and to make true the dreams.
and here are the results of this wonderful project that is the system in venezuela.
and we want to play a little piece for you by one of the most important composers of america.
i control the brain in order to understand how it works.
but think for a moment what that means.
this is because, although each cell in our bodies contains the same set of genes, different mixes of genes get turned on and off in different cells.
they trained the escape reflex that makes the fly jump into the air and fly away whenever you move your hand in position.
and you can see here that the flash of light has exactly the same effect.
she cut the heads off of her flies.
they just stand around and groom excessively.
our actions change the environment, or context, and these changes are then fed back into the decision loop.
it has to decide whether to turn around and stay in the same odor, or whether to cross the midline and try something new.
now for an intelligent being like our fly, this policy is not written in stone but rather changes as the animal learns from experience.
in other words, the fly should learn from mistakes that it thought it had made but, in reality, it had not made.
and then we took these flies and allowed them to make choices.
but the behavior of the fly on the left is very different.
through many such experiments, we were able to narrow down the identity of the critic to just 12 cells.
now consider a situation in which the motors stay off, the fly continues on its path and it suffers some painful consequence such as getting zapped.
in a situation like this, we would expect the critic to speak up and to tell the actor to change its policy.
we have created such a situation, artificially, by turning on the critic with a flash of light.
this is one piece of good news.
in the experiments i told you about, we have lifted the identity of the critic, but we still have no idea how the critic does its job.
but i want to tell it to you the way it really happened -- not the way i present it in a scientific meeting, or the way you'd read it in a scientific paper.
and we wondered how they use these bizarre toes to climb up a wall so quickly.
and here is its first test.
man: this the first time someone has actually climbed with it.
and here is what it does.
if we can show some of the video, you can see it climbing up the wall.
one thing i want to point out is, look at stickybot.
so what they did was they asked us an important question.
we know that you can grab onto things with them.
and perhaps it is most well known that they provide static balance.
it can also act as a counterbalance.
it can also be used in defense.
so we then went back and looked at the animal.
and we ran it up a surface.
but this time what we did is we put a slippery patch that you see in yellow there.
and watch on the right what the animal is doing with its tail when it slips.
and watch it now slip, and see what it does with its tail.
and what would happen if they climbed on the underside of that leaf, and there was some wind, or we shook it?
and this is what we discovered.
and they do it with their tail.
if we could have the lights on it.
and it works just like it does in the animal.
so all you need is a swing of the tail to right yourself.
and here is what it does.
so the wind is coming from the bottom.
it can actually swim through the air.
can you see what they are doing?
here it is in the wind tunnel.
and it certainly looks like it.
you can see it even better from down on top.
watch the whip of its tail as it does it.
look at the end to see the animal.
but then as it gets closer to the tree, look at the close-up.
and see if you can see it land.
now watch up there and you can see the landing.
it actually uses its tail too, just like we saw in the lab.
i can't help but with this wish to think about when you're a little kid and you -- all your friends ask you if a genie could give you one wish in the world, what would it be?
but i really do think it makes sense, and i think that the first step to world peace is for people to meet each other.
so basically what i'd like to talk about today is a way for people to travel, to meet people in a different way than -- because you can't travel all over the world at the same time.
i was asked that i speak a little bit about where i personally come from, and cameron, i don't know how you managed to get out of that one, but i think that building bridges is important to me because of where i come from.
so maybe me starting to take pictures was some kind of way to bring both sides of my family together, a way to take the worlds with me, a way to tell stories visually.
it all kind of started that way, but i think that i really realized the power of the image when i first went to the garbage-collecting village in egypt, when i was about 16.
she's somebody that believes strongly in community service and decided that this was something that i needed to do and so i went there and i met some amazing women there.
there was a center there where they were teaching people how to read and write and get vaccinations against the many diseases you can get from sorting through garbage.
and i began to start teaching there.
people were very upset, very angry that i was showing these dirty sides of cairo, and why didn't i cut the dead donkey out of the frame?
and i just saw the power of the image.
and i think the most important reaction that i saw there was actually people that would never have gone to the garbage village themselves, that would never have seen that the human spirit could thrive in such difficult circumstances.
and i was watching television in new york and there seemed to be just one point of view that was coming across, and the coverage went from the u.s.
state department to embedded troops and what was coming across on the news was that there was going to be this clean war and precision bombings, and the iraqis would be greeting the americans as liberators and throwing flowers at their feet in the streets of baghdad.
and i knew that there was a completely other story that was taking place in the middle east where my parents were.
how are people supposed to have any kind of common understanding or know how to move together into the future?
so i knew that i had to go there.
i just wanted to be in the center.
and when i went there and sat there, and met these people that were in the center of it and sat with these characters, i met some surprising, very complex people.
maybe i will never be able to do it.
but i have plans for my children.
when they finish their high school i will send them to america to study there.
i will pay for their study.
it made me sick to my stomach.
but it doesn't make me believe that we're in world that can live without war yet.
it was amazing to see how people were moved by this film.
and i saw this with audiences.
how do we understand what the other person is thinking?"
now, i don't know whether a film can change the world, but i know that it starts -- i know the power of it -- i know that it starts people thinking about how to change the world.
because i believe that film has the ability to take you across borders.
i'd like you to just sit back and experience for a couple of minutes being taken into another world.
are you sure she is dead?"
when we passed by the first jeep, they opened fire on us.
i deal with children all the time.
but after thinking logically about it, i didn't find any reason why not to meet them and let them know of our suffering.
if we who lost what is most precious can talk to each other, and look forward to a better future, then everyone else must do so, too.
you could give them a long political speech they would still not understand.
now josh rushing actually ended up leaving the military and taking a job with al jazeera, so his feeling is that he's on al jazeera international because he feels like he can actually use media to bridge the gap between east and west.
but i've been trying to think about ways to give power to these independent voices, to give power to the filmmakers, to give power to people who are trying to use film for change.
i'd like for us to imagine for a second -- imagine a day when you have everyone coming together from around the world.
so if you imagine this day when all around the world you have theaters from around the world and places where we project films.
you know, we've been talking to a friend of mine about using the side of the great pyramid and the great wall of china.
and we started calling up everybody.
now, the most amazing part of this whole process has been sharing ideas and wishes, and so i invite you to give brainstorms onto how does this day echo into the future?
and if you just imagine that all of these people in these towns would be watching, then i think that we can actually really make a movement towards people understanding each other better.
i know that it's very intangible, touching people's hearts and souls, but the only way that i know how to do it, the only way that i know how to reach out to somebody's heart and soul all across the world is by showing them a film.
but it would be the day that the world comes together through film, the power of film.
to begin we need a little bit of back story.
and in that moment, there are many people around who thought that that project had already been resolved.
and let me show you what it is that he found.
he said, if i want to describe one more force, maybe i need one more dimension.
this is a man who would risk his life on theory.
let me show you that one visually.
it took so long to get these ants to do this.
let me show you what that would look like.
but what about the second question that i asked: does the theory actually work when you try to apply it to the real world?
until something wonderful happened in our age.
so we go on a journey deep inside the object and examine the constituents.
we also all know that atoms are not the end of the story.
the different particles are responsible for all the richness in the world around us.
so matter and the forces of nature all are put together under the rubric of vibrating strings.
but it raises the question: are we just trying to hide away these extra dimensions, or do they tell us something about the world?
and that question is this: when we look around the world, as scientists have done for the last hundred years, there appear to be about 20 numbers that really describe our universe.
but we believe the answer for why those numbers have the values they do may rely on the form of the extra dimensions.
so can we explain those 20 numbers?
so let me bring some strings into the story.
and we think -- and this is, i think, very exciting -- that in the next five years or so we may be able to test for the existence of these extra dimensions.
let me show you that idea visually.
so this is the kind of experiment that we'll be looking at in the next five, seven to 10 years or so.
and this is an experiment that may test for them in our lifetime.
if you really want to understand the problem that we're facing with the oceans, you have to think about the biology at the same time you think about the physics.
so i will spend a little time at the end.
one of the problems is coming up with the right target.
and i would say, for the people that work in the ocean and think about what the targets should be, we would argue that they must be much lower.
why don't we know some of these things a little bit better?
the ocean contains most of the exchangeable heat on the planet.
so anything that influences how ocean surface waters mix with the deep water changes the ocean of the planet.
but the fact is we do know a lot about all of those things.
this is the ship that i spent the last three months on in the antarctic.
like one of the ways to understand our greenhouse future is to drill down in time to the last period where we had co2 double what it is today.
one day where we had calm seas and sun, which was the reason i could get off the ship.
most of the time it looked like this.
we had a waves up to 50 ft.
it can only get there if it's carried out by ice.
we do expect to see a sea-level rise on the order of one to two meters by the end of this century.
and it could be larger than that.
you can go then and study corals and figure out how often do you see this.
so one of the things thought of in the '80s was to go back and take cores of coral heads throughout the galapagos and find out how often was there a devastating event.
and what we found after drilling back in time two to 400 years was that these were unique events.
so these events in our recent past really are unique.
each one of those is a year.
and we just count on down to the bottom.
then their other attribute is that they have this great chemistry.
some of them show greater variability.
and as it does so, it makes the ocean more acidic.
you have to go back about 30 million years to find a time when co2 levels were double what they are today.
i want to start with a game.
and to win this game, all you have to do is see the reality that's in front of you as it really is.
and one of those dots is the same in the two panels.
and you have to tell me which one.
because it's answering that question that tells us not only why we see what we do, but who we are as individuals, and who we are as a society.
this is a huge problem because it means that the same image could have an infinite number of possible real-world sources.
so let me show you what i mean.
imagine that this is the back of your eye.
they are the same, as far as your eye is concerned.
and yet they come from completely different sources.
so how on earth do we even see?
and i want you to read them out for me, if you can.
because in the statistics of your past experience it would have been useful to do so.
and yet you don't put a letter after that first "t."
now i want you to look at that dot between the green and the red.
but i really want you to learn.
can i have the lights up again?
i take it from your response they don't look the same anymore.
because your brain is seeing that same information as if the right one is still under red light, and the left one is still under green light.
it means that i can take these two identical squares, and i can put them in light and dark surrounds.
and now the one on the dark surround looks lighter than the one on the light surround.
here we have that exact same illusion.
and the same thing over on the right.
and see what happens to your perception.
and yet there is still one on a dark surround and one on a light surround.
because if the tile in that shadow were in fact in shadow, and reflecting the same amount of light to your eye as the one outside the shadow, it would have to be more reflective -- just the laws of physics.
so you see it that way.
so you see it that way.
this is one i made a few years ago.
now i want you to keep looking at it.
raise your hand if you got that.
are we the only ones that see illusions?
the answer to this question is no.
and we do this in what we call the bee matrix.
and here you have the hive.
you see how she has a little number on her?
she has another number on her.
and they land on the flower.
now she is drinking a glass of water that's about that big to you and i, will do that about three times, and then fly.
and sometimes they learn not to go to the blue, but to go to where the other bees go.
and here she comes down the ladder.
and the answer to the question is no.
but those are blue flowers under green light.
so they are using the relationships between the colors to solve the puzzle, which is exactly what we do.
and he is holding a camera.
but we can also do something else.
we can also make music with color.
and this is one of those images.
and this is what it sounds like.
so what i'd like to finish with is this over here.
because what i've been trying to do is really celebrate uncertainty.
now you can see that changes the light that's coming through there.
now, some of you will notice that the consequence is that the light coming through those middle nine on the right, or your left, is exactly the same as the light coming through the middle nine on your right.
now remember, you know the middle nine are exactly the same.
and what i want to do in this talk is to split them apart -- figuring out when they diverge and how they converge.
and language is actually a problem here.
and the question to ask when you look at a security anything is not whether this makes us safer, but whether it's worth the trade-off.
and you can see certain biases that come up again and again.
so you can imagine how that works.
this works until you invent newspapers.
and there are two ways to do this.
i want to add a third element.
so feeling is based on our intuition.
you need a model to understand them.
where do we get these models?
and it depended on if you were attacked by a lion or a leopard or a rhino or an elephant -- and when you had to run away, and when you couldn't run away, and when you had to climb a tree -- when you could never climb a tree.
i would have died in a day, but he was born there, and he understood how to survive.
i could have taken him to new york, and he would have died in a day.
because we had different models based on our different experiences.
a lot of models come from science.
health models are a great example.
as we become more comfortable in our environments, our model can move closer to our feelings.
so a nice example of this came from last year and swine flu.
and people thought doctors should be able to deal with it.
so there was that feeling of lack of control.
and those two things made the risk more than it was.
this kind of thing happens a lot.
i think it depends on the observer.
and i call that their agenda.
when i was a kid, no one wore a seat belt.
what we learn is that changing models is hard.
we can do to the next harvest.
now when these go out of whack, you have two options.
someone else bought it and died.
but it made people feel better.
i visit her in the hospital.
but if you think about it, if you are a hospital, and you need to take a baby away from its mother, out of the room to run some tests, you better have some good security theater, or she's going to rip your arm off.
let me try to convince you of that in a few seconds.
and they are also under threat because they are sharing a planet with people like us.
and people like us want to do things that destroy plants, and their habitats.
and plants sometimes find it rather difficult to move because there might be cities and other things in the way.
so if all human life depends on plants, doesn't it make sense that perhaps we should try to save them?
and i want to tell you about a project to save plants.
and the way that you save plants is by storing seeds.
but it goes down below ground many stories.
and those are the dry land species.
so first of all we did deals with 50 different countries.
people come from all over the world to learn, and then they go away and plan exactly how they're going to collect these seeds.
they have thousands of people all over the world tagging places where those plants are said to exist.
and they go back when their seeds have arrived.
you kind of shovel them all in to bags and dry them off.
and the main thing is that you have to dry them very carefully, at low temperature.
so every 10 years we do germination tests on every sample of seeds that we have.
so all around the world people are doing the same thing.
that means that we know the right combination of heat and cold and the cycles that you have to get to make the seed germinate.
and that is very useful information.
so where have we got to?
this is at least 100 times bigger.
these seeds are used for restoration.
some of these plants, like the ones on the bottom to the left of your screen, they are down to the last few remaining members.
as soon as the door closed...
two out of three ate the marshmallow.
they went to look for these kids who were now 18 and 19.
and they found that 100 percent of the children that had not eaten the marshmallow were successful.
they did not make it to university.
a few were still there with bad grades.
and let me show you what happened.
this little girl was interesting; she ate the inside of the marshmallow.
in other words, she wanted us to think that she had not eaten it, so she would get two.
but we have to watch her.
let me ask you a few questions to see if this is a good choice."
then you sell a lot more.
this is so good that we want a marshmallow book for children.
and now it is all over korea.
and we need to learn that principle here in the states, because we have a big debt.
but even with a cowboy, about one person a month was killed and run over.
and i live in the neighborhood, and i first read about it in the new york times, in an article that said it was going to be demolished.
and i assumed someone was working to preserve it or save it and i could volunteer, but i realized no one was doing anything.
and at the end of the meeting, we realized we were the only two people that were sort of interested in the project; most people wanted to tear it down.
so we exchanged business cards, and we kept calling each other and decided to start this organization, friends of the high line.
and the goal at first was just saving it from demolition, but then we also wanted to figure out what we could do with it.
and the main case was, this is going to make good economic sense for the city.
it really got the city behind it.
it turns out we were wrong on that.
last year we had about two million people, which is about 10 times what we ever estimated.
just one quick example is i realized right after we opened that there were all these people holding hands on the high line.
but you see that happening on the high line, and i think that's the power that public space can have to transform how people experience their city and interact with each other.
but the picture is changing, and we are seeing that there are new key players coming onto the scene.
and we struggle with how to deal with them.
and who would talk to terrorists?
so we've spent more time on focusing on why we should not talk to others than finding out how we talk to others.
and there are times you should walk.
i happen to believe that libya was necessary and that military intervention in afghanistan was also necessary.
10 years after that military intervention, that country is far from secure.
we need military presence, but we need to move to politics.
and you don't have to agree when you sit down with the other side.
let me go one step further.
and who knows what it will be called in the end.
and we find out in the west that we know very little about what's happening.
because we never talk to the people in these countries.
so now that they are emerging in the street and we salute the democratic revolution, we find out how little we know.
if you talk in the right way, you make it very clear that talking is not agreeing.
because they may turn out to be a majority.
how will we ever be interlocutors?
but talking can be done in different ways.
so if we refuse to talk to these new groups that are going to be dominating the news in years to come, we will further radicalization, i believe.
we will make the road from violent activities into politics harder to travel.
so what can we learn from all of this?
i cannot do that unless i send the signals that i will be open to listen to the other side's signals.
we need a lot more training on how to do that and a lot more practice on how that can take problem-solving forward.
we know from our personal experiences that it's easy sometimes just to walk, and sometimes you may need to fight.
and i wouldn't say that is the wrong thing in all circumstances.
we are seeing some new signs.
the good thing is that we are not powerless.
but the problem is that we are coming out of a decade where we had a fear of touching it.
so there are many reasons, and for all of these reasons, this is time and this is why we must talk.
listen for wild stories from the edge of the animal world.
and i could sense that she thought i was speaking synecdochically.
it's the kind of thing that i sit up late at night thinking about sometimes -- often at four in the morning.
so, one of the things that i love to do is travel around the world and look at archaeological sites.
where did they get that inspiration?
how long have they been standing in what positions?
another thing i do is i invent stuff.
the red line is what is done in most nuclear reactors.
it may not seem that, but if you were a microwave, this is how you would view it.
you should all have one in your kitchen, beside your turbochef.
it turns out there are real people who go out and search for extraterrestrials in a very scientific way.
what are all of these pieces?"
another beautifully designed new building ruined by the sound of a common wall light switch.
it's fine during the day when the main rooms are flooded with sunlight.
we know instinctively where to reach when we enter a dark room.
or is it an imitation of one half the set of sounds we make to express disappointment?
why have we settled so quickly for the sound of its switch?
you were late for school again this morning.
the ventriloquist must first make us believe that a small boy is sitting on his lap.
on a crowded bus there was always a lap to sit on.
by understanding our shared tribal tendencies, we can help lead each other to become better individuals.
but they also talked about which candidate they were going to support.
and there were even some polls that were saying she was going to go all the way.
but when we talked to people, it appeared that a funnel effect had happened in these tribes all across the united states.
a tribe is a group of about 20 -- so kind of more than a team -- 20 to about 150 people.
all of you are members of tribes.
in walking around at the break, many of you had met members of your tribe.
and you were talking to them.
and many of you were doing what great, if you will, tribal leaders do, which is to find someone who is a member of a tribe, and to find someone else who is another member of a different tribe, and make introductions.
so here is the bottom line.
and from a distance it appears that it's a single group.
not all tribes are the same, and what makes the difference is the culture.
now here is the net out of this.
this is a bit of a difficult image to put up on the screen.
but it's one that i think we need to learn from.
and i want to make the point that as members of society, we need to.
now, am i saying that there are dumb people working here?
you find them in all places in society.
because it is in stage three that many of us move.
or, "i'm going to find some way to compete with you and come out on top as a result of that."
i know this sounds like a joke.
three doctors walk into a bar.
and they all kind of laughed and they patted him on the back.
and my question on the other side is just going to be, "what do you think they value?"
but they value things like fun.
no one had ever done anything like this before.
who wants to talk that way?
just one little bit of happiness and joy after another.
and those are the ones that change the world.
so the first little finding from this is that leaders need to be able to talk all the levels so that you can touch every person in society.
tribes can only hear one level above and below where they are.
so we have to have the ability to talk all the levels, to go to where they are.
and you know what changed his life?
it was walking into one of these, a boys and girls club.
if you want this experience to live on as something historic, then at the reception tonight i'd like to encourage you to do something beyond what people normally do and call networking.
the story that i like to end with is this.
they wanted to change the world.
so here is the question someone asked.
and they found a way to do the first-ever world poll.
because in order to achieve on this great mission, we have to be able to do it.
but the question on the table is this: what kind of an impact are the tribes that you are in making?
you remember to talk all five culture stages.
and the question that i'd like to leave you with is this: will your tribes change the world?
i want to put it in perspective of the bigger picture of all the other things that are going on -- and then talk about something you haven't heard so much about, which is proteomics.
having explained those, that will set up for what i think will be a different idea about how to go about treating cancer.
so let me start with genomics.
so if i can make an analogy, let's say that you were trying to tell the difference between a good restaurant, a healthy restaurant and a sick restaurant, and all you had was the list of ingredients that they had in their larder.
the part of the genome that we can read is the list of ingredients.
so what you can tell is you can tell the difference between an asian person and a european person by looking at their ingredients list.
but you really for the most part can't tell the difference between a healthy person and a sick person -- except in some of these special cases.
so why all the big deal about genetics?
it is very useful in certain circumstances.
and so by reading the genome, we can find out much more about your family than you probably know.
and so we can discover things that probably you could have found by looking at enough of your relatives, but they may be surprising.
i did the 23andme thing and was very surprised to discover that i am fat and bald.
but sometimes you can learn much more useful things about that.
and so the trick is -- unfortunately, we don't have an easy way to measure these like we can measure the genome.
and so then people get very inconsistent results when they do it this way.
people have tried very hard to do this.
i tried this a couple of times and looked at this problem and gave up on it.
i kept getting this call from this oncologist named david agus.
and applied minds gets a lot of calls from people who want help with their problems, and i didn't think this was a very likely one to call back, so i kept on giving him to the delay list.
we have to have a window into this."
and he took me through specific examples of when he really needed it.
applied minds has enough play money that we can go and just work on something without getting anybody's funding or permission or anything.
so we started playing around with this.
and we can take a different one tomorrow, and you will see your proteins tomorrow will be different -- they'll be different after you eat or after you sleep.
and so this picture, which looks like a big smudge to you, is actually the thing that got me really thrilled about this and made me feel like we were on the right track.
and if we find a pattern of things of the responders to the drug, we see that in the blood, they have the condition that allows them to respond to this drug.
but i think this is actually just the beginning of how we're going to treat cancer.
so let me move to cancer.
and as i looked at it, to me it didn't make sense how we were approaching cancer, and in order to make sense of it, i had to learn where did this come from.
we're treating it as something that got inside of you that we have to kill.
so this is the great paradigm.
that conversation inside of you got mixed up in some way.
well, right now what we do is we divide it by part of the body -- you know, where did it appear?
and of course, it really doesn't have that much to do with what went wrong because cancer is a failure of the system.
i think this is the big mistake.
because normally, your body is dealing with this problem all the time.
so what we need is to have a causative model of what's actually going on, and proteomics actually gives us the ability to build a model like that.
so let me just end with giving you a little picture of what i think cancer treatment will be like in the future.
because your body will do most of the work of fixing it if we just sort of prop it up in the ways that are wrong.
and so your body basically has lots and lots of mechanisms for fixing cancer, and we just have to prop those up in the right way and get them to do the job.
and so i believe that this will be the way that cancer will be treated in the future.
there will be many teams like our team that work on this.
now compassion, when it enters the news, too often comes in the form of feel-good feature pieces or sidebars about heroic people you could never be like or happy endings or examples of self-sacrifice that would seem to be too good to be true most of the time.
and i hope you'll come with me on my basic premise that words matter, that they shape the way we understand ourselves, the way we interpret the world and the way we treat others.
but kindness is an everyday byproduct of all the great virtues.
it can be joined with the harder work of forgiveness and reconciliation, but it can also express itself in the simple act of presence.
i think that compassion also is often linked to beauty -- and by that i mean a willingness to see beauty in the other, not just what it is about them that might need helping.
when we see it, we recognize it and it changes the way we think about what is doable, what is possible.
i first started to learn this most vividly from matthew sanford.
he's been paralyzed from the waist down since he was 13, in a car crash that killed his father and his sister.
"tender" is another word i would love to spend some time resurrecting.
we spend so much time in this culture being driven and aggressive, and i spend a lot of time being those things too.
our traditions have always known this, and that is why they have always cultivated stories at their heart and carried them forward in time for us.
and that the highest human calling is to look for this light, to point at it when we see it, to gather it up, and in so doing, to repair the world.
he liked to talk about the spiritual geniuses of the ages.
what kind of man is this?"
when i was nine years old i went off to summer camp for the first time.
and this might sound antisocial to you, but for us it was really just a different way of being social.
you have the animal warmth of your family sitting right next to you, but you are also free to go roaming around the adventureland inside your own mind.
and i had this idea that camp was going to be just like this, but better.
and on the very first day our counselor gathered us all together and she taught us a cheer that she said we would be doing every day for the rest of the summer to instill camp spirit.
so i couldn't figure out for the life of me why we were supposed to be so rowdy, or why we had to spell this word incorrectly.
and i just waited for the time that i could go off and read my books.
but the first time that i took my book out of my suitcase, the coolest girl in the bunk came up to me and she asked me, "why are you being so mellow?"
and then the second time i tried it, the counselor came up to me with a concerned expression on her face and she repeated the point about camp spirit and said we should all work very hard to be outgoing.
and so i put my books away, back in their suitcase, and i put them under my bed, and there they stayed for the rest of the summer.
and i felt kind of guilty about this.
i felt as if the books needed me somehow, and they were calling out to me and i was forsaking them.
but i did forsake them and i didn't open that suitcase again until i was back home with my family at the end of the summer.
i could have told you 50 others just like it -- all the times that i got the message that somehow my quiet and introverted style of being was not necessarily the right way to go, that i should be trying to pass as more of an extrovert.
and i was always going off to crowded bars when i really would have preferred to just have a nice dinner with friends.
so that's one out of every two or three people you know.
we all internalize it from a very early age without even having a language for what we're doing.
and they all took the spotlight, even though every bone in their bodies was telling them not to.
and this turns out to have a special power all its own, because people could feel that these leaders were at the helm, not because they enjoyed directing others and not out of the pleasure of being looked at; they were there because they had no choice, because they were driven to do what they thought was right.
now i think at this point it's important for me to say that i actually love extroverts.
i always like to say some of my best friends are extroverts, including my beloved husband.
he said that such a man would be in a lunatic asylum, if he existed at all.
and i often think that they have the best of all worlds.
but many of us do recognize ourselves as one type or the other.
and he was actually afraid to meet the young children who read his books for fear that they were expecting him this kind of jolly santa claus-like figure and would be disappointed with his more reserved persona.
and he says that he never would have become such an expert in the first place had he not been too introverted to leave the house when he was growing up.
you might be following the person with the best ideas, but you might not.
and do you really want to leave it up to chance?
now if all this is true, then why are we getting it so wrong?
and why are we making these introverts feel so guilty about wanting to just go off by themselves some of the time?
and so suddenly people are moving from small towns to the cities.
and instead of working alongside people they've known all their lives, now they are having to prove themselves in a crowd of strangers.
and sure enough, the self-help books change to meet these new needs and they start to have names like "how to win friends and influence people."
and the problems that we are facing today in fields like science and in economics are so vast and so complex that we are going to need armies of people coming together to solve them working together.
but i am saying that the more freedom that we give introverts to be themselves, the more likely that they are to come up with their own unique solutions to these problems.
but these are not exactly my books.
but he also loved his congregation, and you could feel this love in the sermons that he gave every week for the 62 years that he was a rabbi.
and people would come from all over to hear him speak.
and even away from the podium, when you called him to say hello, he would often end the conversation prematurely for fear that he was taking up too much of your time.
but when he died at the age of 94, the police had to close down the streets of his neighborhood to accommodate the crowd of people who came out to mourn him.
and so these days i try to learn from my grandfather's example in my own way.
so i just published a book about introversion, and it took me about seven years to write.
but now all of a sudden my job is very different, and my job is to be out here talking about it, talking about introversion.
and that's a lot harder for me, because as honored as i am to be here with all of you right now, this is not my natural milieu.
so i prepared for moments like these as best i could.
and that actually helped a lot.
and so i am going to leave you now with three calls for action for those who share this vision.
but we need much more privacy and much more freedom and much more autonomy at work.
we need to be teaching kids to work together, for sure, but we also need to be teaching them how to work on their own.
they need to work on their own because that is where deep thought comes from in part.
i'm not saying that we all have to now go off and build our own cabins in the woods and never talk to each other again, but i am saying that we could all stand to unplug and get inside our own heads a little more often.
whatever it is, i hope you take these things out every chance you get and grace us with your energy and your joy.
but occasionally, just occasionally, i hope you will open up your suitcases for other people to see, because the world needs you and it needs the things you carry.
so i wish you the best of all possible journeys and the courage to speak softly.
i think inside at some point, we put our heads down on the pillow and we go, "there's got to be more to life than this."
your parents may not have planned you, but i believe god did.
i think you matter to god; i think you matter to history; i think you matter to this universe.
why do i feel like a fake?
why do i feel like i've got to pretend that i'm more than i really am?"
i wanted to tell michael before he spoke that i really appreciate what he does, because it makes my life work a whole lot easier.
and i have learned that there are kooks in every area of life.
when the book became the best-selling book in the world for the last three years, i kind of had my little crisis.
i started it with one other family in 1980.
and all of a sudden, it brought a lot of money and a lot of attention.
and i asked this guy, i said, "well, do you believe that human beings are responsible to make the world a little bit better place for the next generation?
do you believe that as human beings -- i'm not talking about religion -- do you believe that as human beings, it is our responsibility to take care of this planet and make it just a little bit better for the next generation?"
not any more than any other species."
the problem is most people never really think it through.
this is why i believe what i believe."
my wife and i first made five decisions on what to do with the money.
the second thing was, i stopped taking a salary from the church that i pastor.
third thing is, i added up all that the church had paid me over the last 25 years, and i gave it back.
and i gave it back because i didn't want anybody thinking that i do what i do for money -- i don't.
you know, the test of your worldview is not how you act in the good times.
the test of your worldview is how you act at the funeral.
it makes a difference what you believe.
the last thing we did is we became what i call "reverse tithers."
and that is, when my wife and i got married 30 years ago, we started tithing.
so, our first year of marriage we went to 11 percent, second year we went to 12 percent, and the third year we went to 13 percent, and on and on and on.
if money actually made you happy, then the wealthiest people in the world would be the happiest.
it is in giving our lives away that we find meaning, we find significance.
the hard part is, what do i do with all this attention?
because i start getting all kinds of invitations.
i want you to spread the fame of my name through every land.
i want you to give me power.
i want you to make me famous.
i want you to give me influence."
and it just sounds like the most egotistical request you could make if you were going to pray.
and as i read that, i looked at it, and i thought, you know, what this is saying is that the purpose of influence is to speak up for those who have no influence.
the purpose of influence is not to build your ego, or your net worth.
your value is not based on your valuables; it's based on a whole different set of things.
and so the purpose of influence is to speak up for those who have no influence.
and i had to admit, i can't think of the last time i thought of widows and orphans.
and if you saw the movie, you know, he throws it down and it becomes a snake.
he got a few more powerful ways than that to do whatever he wants to do.
and if you want to know what you ought to be doing with your life, you need to look at your shape.
why would god wire you to do something and then not have you do it?
and i just watched their little bodies rise and lower, rise and lower.
and i would look at them -- this is not an accident.
rise and lower -- and i got joy out of just watching them sleep.
the bottom line is, god gets pleasure watching you be you.
but what i'd like to talk to you about today is perhaps a way in which we could use technology to make those accidents happen often.
because i really think, when i look back at how i actually ended up in this accident, technology played a big role in that.
and i think you will see why the two greatest passions in my life today are children and education.
and then i'll come back to the beginning, and tell you a little bit more -- hopefully convince you -- that i believe that in today's world, it is really important for business leaders not only to have an idea of what their business is all about, but to have a passion for something that is meaningful.
so i grew up in a family of women.
i learned a lot about how to deal with that part of the world.
but i was fortunate to be able to have one, and so were my four sisters.
that kind of tells you a little bit of an idea of the emphasis that my parents placed on education.
my father found that in a junkyard, and was able to repair it and make it work.
and even as a child, he was able to instill in me a lot of curiosity.
and i always said that they were really tough on me.
and not tough in the sense that most people think of, where your parents yell at you or hit you or whatever.
first of all, when you go to bed at night, you've got to look back on the day and make sure that you felt the day was a day which you contributed something, and that you did everything you could to do it the best way you could.
and the second thing they said: and we trust you, that no matter where you are or where you go, you will always do the right thing.
when i was out with my friends drinking beer, i always was very aware of those words -- -- and very careful.
the internet happens to be just the medium in which those people and ideas get connected.
and a couple of years ago at amd, we came up with this idea of saying, what if we create this initiative we call 50x15, where we are going to aim, that by the year 2015, half of the world will be connected to the internet so that people and ideas can get connected.
so, it is really a rather lofty initiative, if you want to think that way, but we felt that we had to put a real stake up in the years ahead, that was bold enough and courageous enough that it would force us all to think of ways to do things differently.
and i'll come back to that in a minute, because i think the results so far have been remarkable, and i can only anticipate and get real excited about what i think is going to happen in the next eight years, while we get to the 2015 initiative.
this comes from our friends at gapminder.com.
the connectivity in these parts of the world are really truly phenomenal and continue to increase.
as a matter of fact, i was just recently visiting south africa.
so, we talked about ways in which perhaps one could partner to be able to bring the cost of this technology down.
it is actually a business venture.
what i mean by that is that in some parts of the world, the government plays a key role in the development of technology.
this particular classroom happens to be in the state of michoacan.
and we are learning a lot.
one example of this has been the one laptop per child.
because it was felt that a school day would last at least eight hours, and you wanted the child to have the ability to use the laptop for at least one full day without having to recharge it.
let me come back to the beginning, to end this presentation.
i really believe that you have to have a passion for it.
and it took me a while to understand it, but he said to me, when i went to college, he said, "you're the first person in the family to go to college.
and therefore, this is your opportunity to do better than my generation."
you have to be a better husband than i was, because that's how you make progress."
and now he began to make sense.
because i knew what a great husband he was, and now he was once again beginning to put pressure on me, like he did when i was a little kid.
but the key is that he instilled in me a passion to really get up every day in the morning and want to do better, to really get up and think that my role in life is not just to be the ceo of a fortune 500 company.
it's got to be that someday i can look back, and this place is truly better through some small contribution that perhaps each of us could make.
so in the three years since i talked at ted and showed a prototype, it's gone from an idea to a real laptop.
and that engine is going to see the results in 20 years.
now what are some of the results?
some of the results that go across every single country include teachers saying they have never loved teaching so much, and reading comprehension measured by third parties -- not by us -- skyrockets.
probably the most important thing we see is children teaching parents.
and so when i met with three children from the schools, who had traveled all day to come to bogota, one of the three children brought her mother.
and the reason she brought her mother is that this six-year-old child had been teaching her mother how to read and write.
and this is such an inversion, and such a wonderful example of children being the agents of change.
and then we can actually roll out large numbers.
most of us will do anything to avoid being wrong.
and somewhere in the middle of south dakota, i turn to my friend and i ask her a question that's been bothering me for 2,000 miles.
in fact, most of us do everything we can to avoid thinking about being wrong, or at least to avoid thinking about the possibility that we ourselves are wrong.
we get it in the abstract.
so effectively, we all kind of wind up traveling through life, trapped in this little bubble of feeling very right about everything.
i think this is a problem.
so what i want to do today is, first of all, talk about why we get stuck inside this feeling of being right.
and finally, i want to convince you that it is possible to step outside of that feeling and that if you can do so, it is the single greatest moral, intellectual and creative leap you can make.
so why do we get stuck in this feeling of being right?
so i should actually correct something i said a moment ago.
it does feel like something to be wrong; it feels like being right.
but there's a second reason that we get stuck inside this feeling as well -- and this one is cultural.
so there you are in grade school, and you know exactly what to think about the kid who got this paper.
we learn these really bad lessons really well.
so let me tell you a story.
everything seems to have gone fine.
the point of this story is that trusting too much in the feeling of being on the correct side of anything can be very dangerous.
think for a moment about what it means to feel right.
when that doesn't work, when it turns out those people have all the same facts that we do and they still disagree with us, then we move on to a second assumption, which is that they're idiots.
they have all the right pieces of the puzzle, and they are too moronic to put them together correctly.
and we want everybody else to gaze out of the same window and see the exact same thing.
the miracle of your mind isn't that you can see the world as it is.
we can remember the past, and we can think about the future, and we can imagine what it's like to be some other person in some other place.
and we all do this a little differently, which is why we can all look up at the same night sky and see this and also this and also this.
we think this one thing is going to happen and something else happens instead.
and hosni mubarak thought he was going to be the dictator of egypt for the rest of his life, until he got too old or too sick and could pass the reigns of power onto his son.
and maybe you thought you were going to grow up and marry your high school sweetheart and move back to your hometown and raise a bunch of kids together.
we come up with another idea.
and to do that, you really have to look first at agriculture.
in the measure that you learn how to use water to cultivate, then you're going to be able to spread beyond the nile.
you put a lot of force behind that natural system.
so the lesson in agriculture is that you can actually change the system that's based on brute force as you start merging that system and learning that system and actually applying biology.
and you move from a discipline of engineering, you move from a discipline of chemistry, into a discipline of biology.
he deserves all of this stuff.
and he deserves this stuff because he probably has fed more people than any other human being alive because he researched how to put biology behind seeds.
that is something that a lot of people have criticized.
this is how you farm oil.
and then what did we learn?
then we learned we had to go bigger.
then we have to go even bigger.
there's some questions as to what you should be doing with this stuff.
if that is true, then one of the ways of getting the energy out of coal may not be to rip whole mountaintops off, and it may not be to burn coal.
think of it in the following terms.
do you know he just won the nobel?"
and one of the things this guy just built are these things.
you will see stuff in the next month that will be just as important as this stuff.
this has to be a bridge to the point where you can get to wind, to the point where you can get to solar, to the point where you can get to nuclear -- and hopefully you won't build the next nuclear plant on a beautiful seashore next to an earthquake fault.
this is a very bad system because what happens is your hurdle rate gets set very low.
the oil price goes through the floor.
that company goes out of business, and then you can bring the oil price back up.
what does that do for entrepreneurs?
what does it do for companies?
in the 21st century, we need to actually look at -- and what i'm actually going to encourage you to consider today -- is to go back to our school days when we learned how to count.
but i think it's time for us to think about what we count.
because what we actually count truly counts.
let me start by telling you a little story.
she changed her name to vivian because she wanted to fit in here in america.
so vivian and i have been working together for 23 years.
it made me question and curious: how could someone actually find joy in cleaning toilets for a living?
so i spent time with vivian, and i saw that she didn't find joy in cleaning toilets.
and what gave her inspiration and meaning was the fact that she was taking care of people who were far away from home.
because vivian knew what it was like to be far away from home.
but as i sat there for four hours, the full afternoon, reading maslow, i recognized something that is true of most leaders.
we had nothing that actually could tell us whether we were actually getting it right.
for example, we actually started asking our employees, do they understand the mission of our company, and do they feel like they believe in it, can they actually influence it, and do they feel that their work actually has an impact on it?
miraculously, as we asked these questions and started giving attention higher up the pyramid, what we found is we created more loyalty.
as i went out and started spending time with other leaders out there and asking them how they were getting through that time, what they told me over and over again was that they just manage what they can measure.
so i started asking myself the question: how can we get leaders to start valuing the intangible?
i hate to argue with einstein, but if that which is most valuable in our life and our business actually can't be counted or valued, aren't we going to spend our lives just mired in measuring the mundane?
it was that sort of heady question about what counts that led me to take my ceo hat off for a week and fly off to the himalayan peaks.
and i got to spend some time with the prime minister.
how do you feel about how you spend your time each day?
as i spent my week up in the himalayas, i started to imagine what i call an emotional equation.
but it doesn't count the health of our children or the integrity of our public officials.
so how do we do that?
let me say one thing we can just start doing ten years from now, at least in this country.
but all of those questions are tangible.
he tells me that he can always count on vivian and the staff there to make him feel at home.
what really counts is when we actually use our numbers to truly take into account our people.
what can you start counting today?
what one thing can you start counting today that actually would be meaningful in your life, whether it's your work life or your business life?
all you have to do is read what you see.
is one of the most dangerous things you can do, because it takes you into uncertainty.
so how can we ever do anything new?
the best questions are the ones that create the most uncertainty.
they're the ones that question the things we think to be true already.
it's easy to ask questions about how did life begin, or what extends beyond the universe, but to question what you think to be true already is really stepping into that space.
experts in play will tell you that actually it's a way of being.
what that means is that we play to play.
now if you look at these five ways of being, these are the exact same ways of being you need in order to be a good scientist.
so if you add rules to play, you have a game.
the first step was to ask a question.
so they were asking questions that were significant to expert scientists.
she will now, once she comes onto stage, will be the youngest person to ever speak at ted.
we thought that it was easy to see the link between humans and apes in the way that we think, because we look alike.
we asked the bees to learn not just to go to a certain color, but to a certain color flower only when it's in a certain pattern.
they were only rewarded if they went to the yellow flowers if the yellow flowers were surrounded by the blue, or if the blue flowers were surrounded by the yellow.
so i'm not going to go through the whole details of the study because actually you can read about it, but the next step is observation.
so here are some of the students doing the observations.
and now we want to share.
so we have to write it up.
i put it into a narrative, which means that this paper is written in kidspeak.
all the ones in bold are eight to 10 years old.
we send it back to the editor.
it took four months to do the science, two years to get it published.
i don't have words to explain exactly how i am feeling right now.
can i do it on you?
you have to close your eyes, and you have to point where you hear me clapping.
when he opened his eyes, he was able to see the world in a new way.
changing the way a person thinks about something can be easy or hard.
it all depends on the way the person feels about change.
people got very upset when the bp oil spill happened for very good reason.
people are going to be hurt.
this is a terrible thing, that the oil is going to hurt the people in the gulf."
what people don't think about is: what if the oil had made it safely to shore?
what if the oil actually got where it was trying to go?
it shortens the lives of the people who live there in the gulf.
poor people also suffer at the point of use.
the reason why you want to work hard and have a job and not be poor and broke is so you can have choices, economic choices.
so low-income people often are the ones who are buying the products that have those dangerous chemicals in them that their children are using.
you put yours in the white bin."
we feel so good about ourselves.
i hope someone does something to help them."
and so we're on one planet, and we have to be able to get to the root of these problems.
so now we are at a moment where the coming together of social justice as an idea and ecology as an idea, we finally can now see that they are really, at the end of the day, one idea.
it turns out that our other species has figured out a long time ago how to create many of the things that we need using biological processes that nature knows how to use well.
we would have a different economy.
and the way that we get there is to first of all recognize that the idea of disposability not only hurts the species we've talked about, but it even corrupts our own society.
one out of every four people locked up anywhere in the world is locked up right here in the united states.
and they ask a question, and the question is: how can these people be so passionate?
and so we now get a chance to be truly proud of this movement.
when you were younger, you cared about the whole world, and at some point somebody said you had to pick an issue, you had to boil your love down to an issue.
you've got to shrink it down and be about one issue.
are you going to hug a tree, or are you going to hug a child?
when i was about five years old, not very much -- about a year after mr.
it was a trying and scary thing for a young kid to be going through.
i only get to fly this vehicle occasionally, and only when i can persuade my stockholders to let me do so, but it's still one of those wonderful experiences that reward you for all that time.
if we can get rid of that, then the highways will now be useful to you, as contrasted by what's happening in many parts of the world today.
this world that you're going to be talking about tomorrow is going to be completely integrated.
as that disappeared we came in with highways.
and where is that going to lead you to?
when are we going to be able to have these vehicles?
or it's going to have no use to you as a person who might use such a system.
and then through the various years we invented various vehicles.
and we had very small power plants in it at this time.
we are now installing larger powerplants, which will make it possible for me to get back on board.
it all comes down to that power plant -- how to get a large amount of power in a small package.
if you want to stay alive you've got to have backups.
if one of those fails, you still have a second chance.
you could think of it personally in your own terms, of how you might use it.
but you better be the first one out of town as the real estate values go to hell.
this tower was built on long island back at the beginning of the 1900s.
and the idea was, it was supposed to be able to transfer power anywhere on earth.
but the one thing that did come out of electricity is that we love this stuff so much.
we do have a little bit of a reputation in the united states."
whether that's you in that picture or something under your desk.
do you ever wonder what happens to this stuff?
so when you talk about expensive power, the cost per kilowatt-hour to supply battery power to something is on the order of two to three hundred pounds.
but were able to light that, and do it very successfully.
number one question i get asked.
and it actually causes your car to charge safely and efficiently.
by the way, i do make it look a little bit easier than it is.
it will cause one to get created on the other side.
in when you use just a cord.
so i thought we put a little computer in it that has to wake up to tell it to do that.
it causes one to be created out here.
you want to hang them on the wall.
how many people want to hang them on the wall?
imagine if you can get rid of it.
the other thing i wanted to talk about was safety.
can you make this small enough?"
so we put a little sleeve on the back, but we should be able to get this guy to wake up too.
and those of you that have an iphone recognize the green center.
but they typically use it to light up the screen.
they could go in the floor.
so that when you walk in or you come in from home, if you carry a purse, it works in your purse.
you never have to worry about plugging these things in again.
and think of what that would do for you.
the center for disease control in the u.s.
i realize this is not the kind of relationship that we usually aspire to have with our food.
and believe it or not, a few people have offered to donate their bodies to the project to be eaten by mushrooms.
what i've learned from talking to these folks is that we share a common desire to understand and accept death and to minimize the impact of our death on the environment.
and the saying goes, we came from dust and will return to dust.
and once we understand that we're connected to the environment, we see that the survival of our species depends on the survival of the planet.
what does this all mean for us?
what it means is the web is going to become an exciting place again.
but we want to use our brain!
so what better way to put you back in the driver's seat than to put you in the real world that you interact in every day?
what we want to do is mix in all types of data.
we think a lot of good can come from this technology.
often the first time anyone saw what happened to their house was on virtual earth.
what does it mean to look at it from multiple perspectives?
i can get the next image.
i thank you very much for your time.
the first question there is why china has grown so much faster than india.
the idea there behind these two pictures is that the chinese government can act above rule of law.
and you need a strong government to do that, because you cannot respect private property rights.
if you believe that infrastructures are very important for economic growth, then you would argue a strong government is necessary to promote growth.
if you believe that infrastructures are not as important as many people believe, then you will put less emphasis on strong government.
country 1 has more telephones, and country 1 has a longer system of railways.
this is a very little known fact about the two countries.
let me look at this question more directly.
and which one is a democracy?"
so if you have a choice between being a chinese and being an indian, you would want to become a chinese in order to live 10 years longer.
if you made that decision in 1965, the down side of that is the next year we have the cultural revolution.
so you have to always think carefully about these decisions.
india still has a long way to go to catch up with china.
you talk about human capital, you talk about education and public health.
the government has invested in basic education, has invested in basic health.
i believe the government should do more, but nevertheless, the direction it is moving in is the right direction.
just a few minutes ago, i took this picture about 10 blocks from here.
i took this picture because this turns out to be the first coffeehouse to open in england in 1650.
and the coffeehouse played such a big role in the birth of the enlightenment, in part, because of what people were drinking there.
you would be sharper and more alert.
but what you have to do to make sense of this and to really understand these principles is you have to do away with a lot of the way in which our conventional metaphors and language steers us towards certain concepts of idea-creation.
but in fact, what i would argue and what you really need to kind of begin with is this idea that an idea is a network on the most elemental level.
so the metaphor i'd like the use i can take from a story of a great idea that's quite recent -- a lot more recent than the 1650s.
and so you end up having this problem where you spend all this money getting aid and all these advanced electronics to these countries, and then it ends up being useless.
and this is what they ended up coming with.
and that means that we have to change some of our models of what innovation and deep thinking really looks like, right.
and one of the problems with this is that people are actually -- when you research this field -- people are notoriously unreliable, when they actually kind of self-report on where they have their own good ideas, or their history of their best ideas.
so when they were sitting in front of the microscope, when they were talking to their colleague at the water cooler, and all these things.
the other problem that people have is they like to condense their stories of innovation down to kind of shorter time frames.
so they want to tell the story of the "eureka!"
it will be useful in 2020.
could you just give me some time to do that?"
it was right at 20 mhz, so you could pick it up really easily, because they were afraid that people would think it was a hoax, basically.
so they made it really easy to find it.
we may be the first people in the united states to be listening to this.
and then they played around with it a little bit more, and they talked to a couple of their colleagues who had other kind of specialties.
could you go the other way?
could you work on that problem?"
today i want to talk to you about the future, but first i'm going to tell you a bit about the past.
my story starts way before i was born.
my grandmother was on a train to auschwitz, the death camp.
and somehow -- we don't really know exactly the whole story -- but the train took the wrong track and went to a work camp rather than the death camp.
my family was on a road trip and we were in the grand canyon.
and my mother bought this book when we were at the grand canyon called "the hot zone."
so from that moment on, i read every medical book i could get my hands on, and i just loved it so much.
and this is really what i want to talk to you about today -- about cancer.
and it seemed that tumors actually begin from a stem cell.
but it was left at that.
no one seemed to be asking why.
so i decided to ask why.
is there a reason for this?"
so i decided to ask why.
and the first thing that makes me think is that blood vessels are like highways for the tumor cells.
and i hate to say that.
i decided i would find six children in different countries, and actually go spend some time with the kids, and try to tell their story a little bit better than i thought i had done for time magazine.
and the grandmother had never let any westerners ever see her.
and i was paying for this myself, so i asked the translator if it would be ok if i stayed for the week.
her mother was not raising her, her grandmother was raising her.
and what struck me immediately was how in love the two of these people were.
they slept on the floor at night.
hyun-sook was in fact the fifth child that i found to photograph.
and what struck me immediately in meeting hyun-sook was how confident she appeared to be, how happy she seemed to be in her own skin.
and remember this picture, because i'm going to show you another picture later, but you can see how much she looks like her grandmother, although she looks so western.
i decided to follow her to school.
this is the first morning i stayed with her.
this is on the way to school.
and one of the other things that i said to her through the translator -- again, this thing about saying stop -- was to not pay attention to me.
i noticed that at recess, she was the girl who picked the other girls to be on her team.
this is on the way home.
this is up along the dmz.
and in the course of the grandmother talking to the translator, the grandmother started crying.
and she spoke to the grandmother for a moment, and then she started getting tears in her eyes.
can i get her to a hospital?
could i pay to get her a doctor?
and she refused any help at all.
and i gave the grandmother my business card.
and my best friend had mistakenly one day said something about wishing he had another child.
and my friends actually said they were very interested in adopting her.
but i was off on assignment.
did i know anything about this?
and the house that i had spent time in was empty.
no one in the village would tell me where hyun-sook was, because the grandmother had always hidden her from westerners.
and they had no idea about this request that she'd made of me.
so i finally found myung sung, her best friend that she used to play with after school every day.
and i went to that address and knocked on the door, and a man answered the door.
it was not a very nice area of seoul, as there were mud streets outside of it.
and this man came to the door and kind of barked something in korean.
so the guy kind of reluctantly let us in and we sat down on the floor.
i was very worried about her.
would you like to come and have lunch tomorrow?
because he told me -- i was trying to ask him questions about himself.
and so i went to the hotel, and i found two older amerasians.
a girl whose mother had been a prostitute, and she was a prostitute, and a boy who'd been in and out of jail.
and just -- i want him to understand what happens if she stays here.
who the hell are you to accuse me of something like this?'"
i just think that -- what little i know about the situation, she has very little chance here of having the kind of life that you probably would like her to have."
but he invited me to come to a ceremony they were having that day for her grandmother.
and you can see how different she looks just in three months.
he had three women helping him take care of these kids.
because i wanted him to feel like this was all being done very much above board.
and i always had this mental picture that even though they may have been one of the poorer families in the village, they were one of the most respected families in the village.
he actually agreed to the adoption.
and he said, "the second day she was here she made up a list of all of the names of the older kids and the younger kids.
a lot of the kids who had been adopted actually wrote back to the other kids, telling them about what their life was like with their new families.
so, it was a really big deal when the letters showed up.
this is a woman who is now working at the orphanage, whose son had been adopted.
they really wanted to be able to welcome hyun-sook into their family.
and they spent a lot of time huddled over a dictionary.
this is the third night we were in korea.
i remember his son had the l.l.
and the whole room filled with smoke in about two seconds.
and he closes the door, and the whole room is now filled with smoke.
eleven people ended up dying in the fire.
five people jumped and died, other people were killed by the smoke.
people were lying on the floor.
so it turned into a dual celebration, because natasha was the first person from this village ever to go to the united states.
the adoption people told us it was going to take a year for the adoption to go through.
so i found out the name of every official on both the korean and american side, and i photographed them, and told them how famous they were going to be when this book was done.
and the pilot, i actually knew -- because they used to let me sit in the jump seat, to tell you how long ago this was.
this is 28 hours later in atlanta.
this is a deal i had with natasha, which is that when we got to atlanta she could take -- she could cut off my beard.
she never liked it very much.
she went back to the village.
my talk essentially got written by three historic events that happened within days of each other in the last two months -- seemingly unrelated, but as you will see, actually all having to do with the story i want to tell you today.
dna analysis, one of the hallmarks of the scientific revolution of the last 400 years that he started, was the way we found which set of bones actually belonged to the person who read all those astronomical books which were filled with leftover hair that was copernicus' hair -- obviously not many other people bothered to read these books later on.
and if, in the next couple of months, you walk out in the early evening and look straight up and place you palm like this, you will actually be looking at the field of the sky where this telescope is searching for planets day and night, without any interruption, for the next four years.
we are not going to see the image of the star and the planet as this.
well, let me try to walk you through what we actually see and so you understand the news that i'm here to tell you today.
there will be the smaller planets, and there will be the big planets, even back to the time of epicurus and then of course copernicus and his followers.
so now we have pluto to join the numbers of small planets.
and we do care about planets like the earth because by now we understood that life as a chemical system really needs a smaller planet with water and with rocks and with a lot of complex chemistry to originate, to emerge, to survive.
there is a lot more work we need to do with this.
why i'm here is to tell you that the next step is really the exciting part.
the one that this step is enabling us to do is coming next.
is it like gravity, which is the same everywhere in the universe, or there would be all kinds of different biochemistries wherever we find them?
we need to know what we are looking for when we try to do that.
and a lot of the good news comes from that part of the bridge that we are trying to build as well.
so this is one example that i want to show you here.
now this is just an example to tell you the pathway in which we are trying to answer that bigger question about the universality of the phenomenon.
and in a sense, you can think of that work that people are starting to do now around the world as building a bridge, building a bridge from two sides of the river.
we don't want to go blind because there's too many possibilities, and there is not too much lab, and there is not enough human time to actually to do all the experiments.
so that's what we are building from the left side of the river.
from the right bank of the river are the experiments in the lab that i just showed you, where we actually tried that, and it feeds back and forth, and we hope to meet in the middle one day.
so why should you care about that?
well, there are many reasons, and you heard some of them in the short talk today.
this understanding of chemistry actually can help us with our daily lives.
it is the earth as we know it.
would that make us more responsible for what is happening today?
can you imagine how small it is?
if that was the age of the universe, then this is the age of life on earth.
life and the universe compare to each other like a child and a parent, parent and offspring.
so what does this tell us?
and almost the same happens here.
but it's very good that what is done is being done.
it is only by stopping the transmission that the world will be able to deal with it.
i had the fortune to live and work for a time in the united states.
the difference goes from 11 percent down to four percent, and it is even bigger among women.
but what we think is that it could be concurrency.
and you collect a big number of exes.
and what makes me so happy is that we are moving now towards fact when we look at this.
and we hope that when we act on global problems in the future we will not only have the heart, we will not only have the money, but we will also use the brain.
and we know that most of them are dead.
and we also know that most of them live or lived in asia.
and we also know that most of them were or are very poor -- did not live for very long.
we know that most of that wealth was made after the year 1800.
this is not a new question.
the same wind that carries them back would bring us thither?"
he said it was "because they have laws and rules invented by reason."
and the result is an even bigger divergence in a very short space of time than happened in germany.
so let me just explain to you that the smartest man ever was a scotsman.
that is so right and so cool.
and he said it such a long time ago.
i want to explain to you that there were six killer apps that set the west apart from the rest.
there are six which i think explain the great divergence.
you just have to feed me."
and you can see here the huge divergence that happens in property ownership between north and south.
and this is part of a really extraordinary phenomenon, and that is the end of the great divergence.
so i want to end with three questions for the future billions, just ahead of 2016, when the united states will lose its place as number one economy to china.
that tells you something really important.
we spend long days and nights staring at this part of the spider.
and this is what we see.
this is the kind of sequence that i love looking at day and night.
so what you can see here is that the five fibers have different behaviors.
how do groups get anything done?
it can be private or public.
it can be for profit or not profit.
it can be large or small.
some people get less dressed up.
and i was then able to go and retrieve them to give you that little slideshow.
how do we get those people together to contribute that work?
and i want to call your attention to some of the side effects of going the institutional route.
you have to have physical structure.
we're now able to do that kind of thing with groups.
and everything that was hard about the coordination cost with the mermaid parade is even harder here.
the photos are spread out over a longer period of time.
the costs of running the institution mean that you cannot take on the work of those people easily in an institutional frame.
you can hire those people as employees, you can coordinate their work and you can get some output.
one of the first things that happens when you institutionalize a problem is that the first goal of the institution immediately shifts from whatever the nominal goal was to self-preservation.
you can follow this in the guardian.
the bigger question is, what do you do about the value down here?
i've used a lot of examples from flickr, but there are actually stories about this from all over.
i think this is a revolution.
i think that this is a really profound change in the way human affairs are arranged.
and i use that word advisedly.
how will they share ideas and opinions?
but it turns out that the logic of the support group is value neutral.
a support group is simply a small group that wants to maintain a way of living in the context of a larger group.
it takes us from point a to chaos.
the forces are general, but the results are going to be specific.
try not to eat a slice.
they like to eat healthy and healthily, but when we think of something as a health food, we think of it as something we eat out of obligation, not out of passion and love for the flavor.
and this is what every student has to begin with.
it can be for a few seconds.
it can be for 20 or 30 minutes.
we call that resting or benching.
it can be in a basket.
but i want to go back now and revisit these steps, and talk about it from the standpoint of transformation, because i really believe that all things can be understood -- and this is not my own idea.
because what happens is, bread begins as wheat or any other grain.
wheat is a grass that grows in the field.
and we harvest those seeds, and those are the wheat kernels.
we can plant those in the ground.
and we save some of those for the next generation.
but most of those seeds get crushed and turned into flour.
so we turn it into flour.
and then we divide it, and this one big piece of dough is divided into smaller units, and each of those units are given shape by the baker.
this is the product that everyone in the world eats, that is so difficult to give up.
this is what bread has taught me in my journey.
and if you make this bread, you can use any kind of spent grain from any type of beer.
what i'd like to do today is to start with an excerpt of a piece of music at the piano.
it gets a little bit boring, and so pretty soon i go through other instruments, they become familiar, and eventually i find myself designing and constructing my own instrument, and i brought one with me today, and i thought i would play a little bit on it for you so you can hear what it sounds like.
and with a bank of live electronics, i can change the sounds radically.
so this gives you a little bit of an idea of the sound world of this instrument, which i think is quite interesting and it puts me in the role of the inventor, and the nice thing about  this instrument is called the mouseketeer ...
now this was a really exciting experience for me.
it was gratifying musically, but i think the more important thing is it was exciting because i got to take on another role, especially given that it appeared in a museum, and that is as visual artist.
i took the idea of the wristwatch, and i turned it into a musical score.
another role that i like to take on is that of the performance artist.
i want to show you a clip from a piece called "echolalia."
so that gives you a little taste of that piece.
let me give you just one example of this.
one thing that this baby could be thinking about, that could be going on in his mind, is trying to figure out what's going on in the mind of that other baby.
and maybe the hardest thing of all is to figure out that what other people think and feel isn't actually exactly like what we think and feel.
we wanted to know if babies and young children could understand this really profound thing about other people.
so how do we actually ask them the question?
well it turns out that the secret was broccoli.
but then what betty did was to take a little taste of food from each bowl.
and she would act as if she liked it or she didn't.
so she'd act as if what she wanted was just the opposite of what the babies wanted.
so the question is: what would the baby give her, what they liked or what she liked?
and what's more, they felt that they should actually do things to help other people get what they wanted.
so children both know more and learn more than we ever would have thought.
the question you might ask though is: why do children learn so much?
and how is it possible for them to learn so much in such a short time?
but if we turn to evolution for an answer to this puzzle of why we spend so much time taking care of useless babies, it turns out that there's actually an answer.
they depend on their moms to drop worms in their little open mouths for as long as two years, which is a really long time in the life of a bird.
and of course, we human beings are way out on the end of the distribution like the crows.
we have bigger brains relative to our bodies by far than any other animal.
and our babies and children are dependent on us for much longer than the babies of any other species.
you want to know all that before the mastodons actually show up.
so the idea is that we have this early period when we're completely protected.
all we have to do is learn.
and then as adults, we can take all those things that we learned when we were babies and children and actually put them to work to do things out there in the world.
so one way of thinking about it is that babies and young children are like the research and development division of the human species.
we have to take all those ideas that we learned when we were children and actually put them to use.
but real computers are actually getting to be a lot better.
they go out and test it against the evidence.
then they test that new hypothesis and so on and so forth.
all right, now that might seem like an even taller order to actually demonstrate.
how could it be that children are doing statistics?
this is a box that lights up and plays music when you put some things on it and not others.
if i showed you this detector, you would be likely to think to begin with that the way to make the detector go would be to put a block on top of the detector.
so we did just this; we gave four year-olds this pattern of evidence, and we just asked them to make it go.
now there are two things that are really interesting about this.
and what she did was show children that yellow ones made it go and red ones didn't, and then she showed them an anomaly.
he told the experimenter to do this, to try putting it out onto the other location.
so you put four on this one to make it light up and two on this one to make it light up.
if you look at the way children play, when you ask them to explain something, what they really do is do a series of experiments.
i think babies and children are actually more conscious than we are as adults.
and we even know something about the way the brain does this.
if we look at babies and young children, we see something very different.
so babies and young children are very bad at narrowing down to just one thing.
so when we say that babies and young children are bad at paying attention, what we really mean is that they're bad at not paying attention.
so they're bad at getting rid of all the interesting things that could tell them something and just looking at the thing that's important.
well if we want to think about a way of getting a taste of that kind of baby consciousness as adults, i think the best thing is think about cases where we're put in a new situation that we've never been in before -- when we fall in love with someone new, or when we're in a new city for the first time.
i don't want to say too much about how wonderful babies are.
we can do things like tie our shoelaces and cross the street by ourselves.
and it makes sense that we put a lot of effort into making babies think like adults do.
but if what we want is to be like those butterflies, to have open-mindedness, open learning, imagination, creativity, innovation, maybe at least some of the time we should be getting the adults to start thinking more like children.
and what you can see is -- it is actually a very good game.
and you can see he looks always the same.
the reason for that is that these characters are actually not real characters.
all you have is animations that are played back at more or less the appropriate times.
what we tried to do was teach a stick figure how to walk.
you can see it here on the screen.
the tricky bit is now to put an ai controller in it that actually makes it work.
we heard about those already yesterday, and i suppose that most of you are familiar with that already.
so that was the idea behind this.
it took about three to four hours to run the simulation.
i got up the next morning, went to the computer and looked at the results, and was hoping for something that walked in a straight line, like i've just demonstrated, and this is what i got instead.
what we really wanted was a full human body.
what you see is it takes steps backwards, it tries to counter-balance, it tries to look at the place where it thinks it's going to land.
what this is now is a real simulation.
and you see it falls differently.
that was really exciting for us to see that.
this is the first time the public sees this as well, because we have been in stealth mode.
we just did that for a laugh, just to see what happens.
this is not a dead body.
this is a body who basically, in this particular case, feels the force and tries to protect its head.
you feel kind of sorry for that thing, and we've seen it so many times now that we don't really care any more.
this is happening in real time.
this is another behavior they requested.
you feel kind of sorry for the guy.
it was a very dangerous stunt.
we are ourselves surprised what you actually get out of the simulations.
there's so many things we can do with this right now.
a third thing we are looking at and very interested in is simulation.
that's what we thought was going to come out of this.
and what you see after a while -- i think he even goes into a climax right at the end.
and i want to share with you my latest art project.
you can make the baby poop.
you can do all those fun things.
i have to tell you about my childhood.
i remember we cried profusely when the little goats we played with in the summer became biriani.
we all had to fast during ramadan.
it was a very beautiful time.
and conversely, only when you teach perspectives will a child be able to imagine and put themselves in the shoes of someone who is different from them.
and you listen to the sounds of silence.
it may be good technology, but i feel like there's not enough of a support structure.
your call may be recorded so that they can collect the funniest dumb user stories and pass them around on a cd.
some of the stories are just so classic, and yet so understandable.
so we must admit that some of the blame falls squarely at the feet of the users.
so it gets to be more and more of a challenge.
where are you going to stick them?
they could have put them all out in view.
so there is a limit that we don't want to cross.
now what do i mean by that?
there are 200 countries in the world.
so why in god's name do you see this every time you print?
i actually got to speak to palm when they were flying high in the '90s, and after the talk, i met one of the employees.
i am bill gates and i write the code.
i liked the media center pc.
the things are coming out at a faster pace.
all that you see is a kid in his teens who started out in a garage with only a buddy named woz.
i still wear sandals in any weather.
people did not think it was worth putting a price on it.
this is the one they wanted.
and there are signs that the industry is getting the message.
i never have to lose anything.
will you be my power plug?
and i'm sure every one of you has done this at some point in your lives, or one of your children.
in my very last example -- i do a lot of my work using speech recognition software, and you have to be kind of quiet because the software is nervous.
but the point is: i can respond to people very quickly by saying a short word and having it write out a much longer thing.
this cult of doing things right is starting to spread.
and what i found was quite surprising.
so that this is possible to do this is not deniable.
we get our individual rights by society protecting us from others not doing everything they can do but largely doing only what is legal.
so these are the kind of thoughts i was thinking in 1999 and 2000, and my friends told me i was getting really depressed, and they were really worried about me.
and then i was there on september 11th, and i stood in the streets with everyone.
and it was quite an experience to be there.
it was always a surprise that it happened then and there, but it wasn't a surprise that it happened at all.
and everyone then started writing about this.
thousands of people started writing about this.
but i agreed to come and say a few things about this.
and i would say that we can't give up the rule of law to fight an asymmetric threat, which is what we seem to be doing because of the present, the people that are in power, because that's to give up the thing that makes civilization.
i've been amazed in the last year at the incredible quality and excitement of the innovations that have come across my desk.
i'm very thankful for google and wikipedia so i can understand at least a little of what people are talking about who come through the doors.
but i wanted to share with you three areas that i'm particularly excited about and that relate to the problems that i was talking about in the wired article.
we can know what the computers are going to be like in 2020.
people are moving to the cities.
and i want to give you a specific example of a new material that was discovered 15 years ago.
and john doerr and brook and others got concerned, [unclear], and we started looking around at what the world was doing about being prepared for a pandemic.
and we saw a lot of gaps.
we need new kinds of vaccines.
if we let an unlimited amount of power loose, then we will -- a very small number of people will be able to abuse it.
so what we need to do is, we need better policy.
so if you wanted to put a drug on the market you could put it on.
how could you keep the law?
i think the law would be a really good thing to keep.
so if you tie that -- you have to tie that back with the law.
we may not be able to stop it, but the likelihood that it will get past us is lower if we focus on that problem.
so we can design the future if we choose what kind of things we want to have happen and not have happen, and steer us to a lower-risk place.
but above all, what we have to do is we have to help the good guys, the people on the defensive side, have an advantage over the people who want to abuse things.
and what we have to do to do that is we have to limit access to certain information.
and growing up as we have, and holding very high the value of free speech, this is a hard thing for us to accept -- for all of us to accept.
benjamin wallace on the price of happiness
in 1985, he announced to his friends in the wine world that he had made this incredible discovery.
i think they wanted to believe that the most expensive bottle of wine in the world must be the best bottle of wine in the world, must be the rarest bottle of wine in the world.
i became increasingly, kind of voyeuristically interested in the question of you know, why do people spend these crazy amounts of money, not only on wine but on lots of things, and are they living a better life than me?
there are very few places in the u.s.
i was really happy when i was done.
one of the most expensive luxury foods by weight in the world.
it comes with its own wine cellar that you can draw freely from.
i washed my face with this this morning in preparation for this.
i did a blind taste test of this with 20 people and five other olive oils.
the olive oil that came in first was actually a bottle of whole foods 365 olive oil which had been oxidizing next to my stove for six months.
and i want to get one of these.
this was another one i could not get a loaner of.
and you spend a third of your life in bed.
it was such a smooth ride.
most of the cars that i drive, if i get up to 80 they start to rattle.
and i had no idea that i was one of those obnoxious people you occasionally see weaving in and out of traffic, because it was just that smooth.
there were some people who were a little less impressed.
a lot of people, you know, said that they liked the more expensive wine more -- it was the same wine, but they thought it was a different one that was more expensive.
so i have a really cool day job-- i get to do some really amazing stuff.
something i never talk about in scientific meetings is how i actually got to this state and why i do the work that i do.
the next element is the fact that i have applied a value judgment and my value judgment is that the presence of life is better than no life.
and so i think that that holds together a great deal of the work that people in this audience approach.
and all of this seems to me to be a salient point in history.
how hard is it going to be to find life on mars?
and so this is very exciting news.
and the reason that they have changed is because we now have new information.
and so where there is water, there is a very high chance of our kind of life.
so this is a very bold statement.
how do you plan to look for it?
how do you know it when you find it?
so why might it be hard to find?
but the real issue is that we are guided by our limited experience, and until we can think out of the box of our cranium and what we know, then we can't recognize what to look for, or how to plan for it.
i always turn my head on the side, and that simple change makes me go from seeing this planet as home, to seeing it as a planet.
this shows one of the most extreme caves that we work in.
but one of the most famous objects out of this are what we call snottites, for obvious reasons.
in some of the other amazing caves that we work in -- this is in lechuguilla cave in new mexico near carlsbad, and this is one of the most famous caves in the world.
we face the problem of, how can we do this robotically?
why would we want to do it robotically?
and one of the best ways to study something without contaminating it is to have an intermediary.
and these allow them to hop.
if you send a thousand of them, you could probably get rid of 90 percent of them and still have a mission.
it occurred to us a number of years ago that caves have many properties that people have used and other organisms have used as habitat in the past.
and the future is there for us to use these lava-tube caves on mars.
one of the burning questions, of course, is if we go there and find life in the sub-surface, as i fully expect that we will, is that a second genesis of life?
imagine telling someone that you meet today what you're going to do.
any time you have a goal, there are some steps that need to be done, some work that needs to be done in order to achieve it.
ideally, you would not be satisfied until you had actually done the work.
the mind is kind of tricked into feeling that it's already done.
so this goes against the conventional wisdom that we should tell our friends our goals, right -- so they hold us to it.
then half of them announced their commitment to this goal to the room, and half didn't.
then everyone was given 45 minutes of work that would directly lead them towards their goal, but they were told that they could stop at any time.
and actually, lo and behold, it looks pretty much like the areas of the world that are hungry are also the areas of the world that are pretty insecure.
and while i was there, i came across what i think is the most brilliant of their programs.
while i was working at the u.n., i met this girl.
but each bag we'd sell would provide a year's worth of school meals for one kid.
we could sell these bags and raise a ton of money and a ton of awareness for the world food programme.
we did this bag for haiti, and we launched it just a month after the earthquake to provide school meals for kids in haiti.
i think about eating a lot, and i really love it.
what are both those things about?
it's very consolidated, and the foods that are produced lead to the foods that we eat.
and their farms are also large.
and in america, a lot of what we eat has led to obesity and has led to a real change in sort of what our diet is in the last 30 years.
but people do because it's so cheap, and so our whole food system in the last 30 years has really shifted.
and instead of taking these two things as bifurcated problems that are very separate, it's really important to look at them as one system.
we get a lot of our food from all around the world, and people from all around the world are importing our food system, so it's incredibly relevant to start a new way of looking at it.
so there's a lot of reasons to take this 30-year time period as sort of the creation of this new food system.
so my second dream is that i think we can look to the next 30 years as a time to change the food system again.
but i really hope that you will all think of ways that you can look long term at things like the food system and make change.
and i think that we can learn some pretty amazing things by looking at how we do this.
and in particular, i think we can learn things about learning.
and i think the most interesting way to think about how all this is going on is in terms of rewards.
and this kind of a world, this vast flying beast you can ride around, shows why games are so very good at doing both the wanting and the liking.
every single thing that every single person who's ever played in a game has ever done can be measured.
and this allows something very special to happen in games.
now, to try and explain this in sort of real terms, i want to talk about a kind of task that might fall to you in so many games.
go and get a certain amount of a certain little game-y item.
you find that -- you know, between five and 20 is about the right number for keeping people going.
and what we do is make sure that every time a box is opened, there's something in it, some little reward that keeps people progressing and engaged.
and each of these rewards is carefully calibrated to the item.
so all this is very powerful.
so we can do some rather amazing things.
and one thing they certainly do at the moment is if you got a 0.1 percent awesome item, they make very sure another one doesn't appear for a certain length of time to keep the value, to keep it special.
and the point is really that we evolved to be satisfied by the world in particular ways.
so what does all this mean in practice?
but if you can model things for people, if you can give things to people that they can manipulate and play with and where the feedback comes, then they can learn a lesson, they can see, they can move on, they can understand.
we just want to go back and find out more.
and two things really flow from this.
the first has to do with memory, that we can find these moments.
this can all seem very sinister.
and every time you turned up to go on a mission, you got paid in dragon kill points.
we can offer people the grand continuity of experience and personal investment.
and if we can look at these things and learn from them and see how to turn them outwards, then i really think we have something quite revolutionary on our hands.
so this is a picture of me holding one of the first watercolor paintings i ever made.
these are two of my sketchbooks.
i have many of these books, and i've been keeping them for about the last eight or nine years.
and, you know, after keeping these books for a number of years, i started to become very interested in collecting not only my own personal artifacts, but also the artifacts of other people.
have fun in whatever you do."
as opposed to knowing the whole story, just knowing a little bit of the story, and then letting your own mind fill in the rest.
and that idea of a partial glimpse is something that will come back in a lot of the work i'll be showing later today.
one such project is about a year and a half old.
so the small ones are short, and the bigger ones are longer.
you can also stop a raindrop and open the feeling inside.
and that would provide the community's food supply for a long time.
what are the things that make up a story?
stories take place in a certain area.
you can start to see some of the story here, told by color.
and things go white as we move out onto the arctic ocean.
and any of these can be clicked, and then the narrative is entered at that position.
this is the food we ate.
this is in the patkotak's family living room in their house in barrow.
and so what i'll show you now is the ability to pull out sub-stories.
and they provide the food source for the community for much of the year.
so what i'm going to tell you about next is a very new thing.
and it leads to just a completely different value system.
so i went around and i talked to people about some of these ideas.
so, you have some really happy person holding 10 balloons, and some really sad soul holding one balloon.
and then i would ask them a number of questions like what was the happiest day in their life, what makes them happy.
and then finally, i would ask them to make a wish.
and when they made a wish, i would write their wish onto one of the balloons and take a picture of them holding it.
his wish was to become a police officer.
her wish was to have been born a boy.
he wanted to help poor people.
she was chaffing wheat, and that pile of wheat behind her had taken her about a week to make.
you can really start to see the stories told by the hands here.
this guy was breaking rocks with a hammer in the hot sunlight, but he just wanted to spend his life as a farmer.
he wanted to live a long life at the monastery.
but all he wanted was to just live a comfortable life, like other people.
i caught her on her lunch break.
her wish was to marry someone with a car.
she wanted a change in her life.
she lives in a little worker's camp right next to the road, and she wanted a different lot on things.
he travels from farm to farm each day trying to find work, and then he tries to sleep at whatever farm he gets work at.
so his wish was to come with me, so that he had somewhere to live.
he wanted to join a school and learn to read, but his parents didn't have enough money to send him to school.
his wish was to make some money and open a store.
i just thought that was amazing.
but here she had been living in a nunnery for the last seven years.
i asked her a little bit more about the cave and what she planned would happen once she went there, you know.
what if she saw the truth after just one year, what would she do for the next 35 years in her life?
and this is what she said.
do you hope -- would you prefer to live in the cave for 40 years, or to live for one year?
jh: so if you caught that, she said she hoped to die when she was around 40.
that was enough life for her.
and up there, there are thousands of prayer flags that people have spread out over the years.
and we re-inflated all of the balloons, put them up on a string, and hung them up there among the prayer flags.
i was thrilled to be the only person standing on the stage with a shiny silver helmet.
i stayed thrilled until i got home, threw the helmet onto my bed, fell down onto my bed and realized inside there was an inscription.
and we were going to do something that was horrible for the profession.
but it has to be done together.
now, i believe that one really amazing thing will happen if you do this.
you do not know what the end result is.
well, how about instead of doing that, we roll up to the gates something they want.
now this is a little bit of a dangerous metaphor, because of course we all know that inside of the trojan horse were a bunch of people with spears.
and if i could summarize that all up into one single sketch it would be this.
and this had to do with the ambitions of the leadership.
because they could do whatever they wanted to to this building.
it was to take all the things that are known as front of house and back of house and redefine them as above house and below house.
we created what we like to call superfly.
but there was a third advantage that we got by doing this move that was unexpected.
now, in order to do this we and the clients had to do something fairly remarkable.
in fact it really was the clients who had to do it.
one of the things that we learned when we visited various theaters is they hate us architects, because they say the first thing they have to do, the first five minutes of any show, is they have to get our architecture out of the mind of their patron.
well now there are potentials of this building to allow the artistic director to actually move into the building without using our architecture.
i have to say honestly this is not something yet the building can do because it takes too long.
it is taking the hand of the architect to actually remove the hand of the architect in favor of the hand of the artistic director.
this is the flat floor configuration.
here you see that the balconies actually have to move out of the way in order to bring a thrust into the space.
and some of the seats need to actually change their direction, and change their rake, to allow that to happen.
meaning, nothing that we do can we be the first ones to do it.
as far as we know this is the first building in the world in which the proscenium can entirely fly out of the space.
actually this is not a curtain.
you'd be able to open portions in order to change the procession, allow people to come in and out for an intermission, or to enter for the beginning or the end of a performance.
here it is in a flat floor configuration.
this is the first time that actually the changeover was done and so there is literally thousands of people because everyone was excited and wanted to be a part of it.
and think of it being done with just a few people.
and to remind you that here is an example in which architecture actually did something.
and i think the main thing that i'm interested in is trying to find a way of making the computer into a personal mode of expression.
and the idea is to visualize their speech and song behind them with a large screen.
the problem that i want to talk with you about is really the problem of: how does one supply healthcare in a world in which cost is everything?
let me just give you two examples.
and the combination of those two is a first order shot at a number of useful things that you want.
the second is, you can put lots and lots of tests in a very small place.
and the most common of these is in a device that looks like the thing on the left.
there are an awful lot of colors and things like that.
what do you actually do about that in a difficult circumstance?
and there is an example of the kind of thing that you see.
and so i regard that as done.
now, the next question that you would like to ask is: what would you like to measure?
what would you like to analyze?
do they have a common cold?
a friend of mine works in transcultural psychiatry, and he is interested in the question of why people do and don't take their meds.
and these are the things that get him through his day.
all right now let me show you just a little bit about advanced devices.
what you see here is another centimeter-sized device, and the different colors are different colors of dye.
and you notice something which might strike you as a little bit interesting, which is the yellow seems to disappear, get through the blue, and then get through the red.
how do you make something flow through something?
you make it flow under and over.
but now the question is: how do you make it flow under and over in a piece of paper?
and in this particular case we were just interested in the replicability of that.
and we thought for a while of how you might do this and the way, in fact, you do it is what's shown here.
here is another example of something which is -- this is a little spectrophotometer.
i know what it is but i don't actually know what it means.
so, i actually was interested enough in this to put together several groups of people.
and the most recent involved a couple of people at mit, one of them being an exceptionally bright kid who is one of the very few people i would think of who's an authentic genius.
we all struggled for an entire day to think about simplicity.
and i want to give you the answer of this deep scientific thought.
why were more people killed last month than in any preceding month of this conflict?
we came out of the end of the cold war in despair.
why are we still stuck in afghanistan?
but in those early days when we're told we didn't have enough troops and enough resources, we made a lot of progress in afghanistan.
and we had progress in the free media.
and the same is true for the troops.
when i walked across afghanistan, i stayed with people like this.
now this is not to say afghanistan is a place full of people like mullah mustafa.
now is this a new idea?
no, there have been any number of people saying this over the last seven years.
how do we allow any of this to happen?
we need to somehow get their message to the policymakers.
and this is very difficult to do because of our structures.
the first thing we need to change is the structures of our government.
today when you go to bosnia it is almost impossible to believe that what we saw in the early 1990s happened.
but you need to look at context.
we criticized people a lot in bosnia for being quite slow to take on war criminals.
we criticized them for being quite slow to return refugees.
so if i can finish with a metaphor for intervention, what we need to think of is something like mountain rescue.
this is the wrong way of looking at it.
you need to look at it in the way that you look at mountain rescue.
you understand that you can prepare, but the amount of preparation you can do is limited -- you can take some water, you can have a map, you can have a pack.
because the worst thing we have done in afghanistan is this idea that failure is not an option.
the problem in libya is that we are always pushing for the black or white.
and we are always being tempted up to our neck.
we put our toes in and we go up to our neck.
what we should have done in libya is we should have stuck to the u.n.
i want to talk about the election.
but there is also this part of the country, kind of in the middle region here.
he lost no worse than most people do.
we know that race was a factor, and the reason why we know that is because we asked those people.
so you see big differences in different parts of the country on this question.
this really seems to explain why barack obama did worse in this one part of the country.
so we have to ask why.
and so we can look at a bunch of different variables.
so what we're going to do now is take the white people in the survey and split them between those who have black neighbors -- or, really, some neighbor of another race -- and people who have only white neighbors.
just based on who lives in your immediate neighborhood around you.
but also not everyone wants to live in a city, certainly not a city like new york.
so we can think more about things like street grids.
do it at the high school level.
i think part of the education variable we talked about before is the networking experience you get when you go to college where you do get a mix of people that you might not interact with otherwise.
i'd like to introduce you first to this person whose image you may or may not recognize.
and bell then goes on to explain to the students.
and when bell actually strips the patient, begins to examine the patient, you can only imagine how much more he would discern.
but you might not realize that our ability to look into the body in this simple way, using our senses, is quite recent.
and his father used to go down into the basement to tap on the sides of casks of wine to determine how much wine was left and whether to reorder.
one was scratching at the end of the stick, another child listened at the other end.
and laennec thought this would be a wonderful way to listen to the chest or listen to the abdomen using what he called "the cylinder."
when are they going to come by and explain things to me?
i want to show you a picture of what rounds looked like when i was in training.
we went from bed to bed.
now i've been influenced in this thinking by two anecdotes that i want to share with you.
this is when i was in texas.
and she then spent a lot of time researching to find the best cancer center in the world to get her subsequent care.
and she found the place and decided to go there, went there.
which is why i was surprised a few months later to see her back in our own town, getting her subsequent care with her private oncologist.
now you and i could argue that they probably did not need to touch her breasts.
i was very influenced by that anecdote.
this is not a reputation you would wish on your worst enemy.
i say that because these are difficult patients.
they have often been rejected by their families, have had bad experiences with medical care and they come to you fully prepared for you to join the long list of people who's about to disappoint them.
and i learned very early on with my first patient that i could not do justice to this very complicated patient with all the records they were bringing in a new patient visit of 45 minutes.
and so i hit on this method where i invited the patient to tell me the story for their entire first visit, and i tried not to interrupt them.
and if i ever get to heaven, it will be because i held my piece for 45 minutes and did not interrupt my patient.
and i remember my very first patient in that series continued to tell me more history during what was meant to be the physical exam visit.
and i remember having a very eerie sense that the patient and i had slipped back into a primitive ritual in which i had a role and the patient had a role.
and i always felt that if my patient gave up the quest for the magic doctor, the magic treatment and began with me on a course towards wellness, it was because i had earned the right to tell them these things by virtue of the examination.
and they helped me understand that rituals are all about transformation.
i am a writer, and i want to close by reading you a short passage that i wrote that has to do very much with this scene.
i would pull down the eyelids.
i would look at the tongue.
i would listen to the heart.
when he saw me on what turned out to be his last hours on this earth, his hands moved as if in slow motion.
i think he surely must have known by then that it was vital for me just as it was necessary for him.
i will see you through this.
i will be with you through the end."
so the way it works is, you go down the hallway and you see if it tilts toward a particular locker, and then you open the locker.
so it looks something like this.
in science we have to keep the whole database, and look to see if the number of hits somehow stands out from the total number that you would expect by chance.
each one has a particular theme, like this one is on the future of intelligence.
are people getting smarter or dumber?
and before we say something is out of this world, we should first make sure that it's not in this world.
i think you need to be more explicit here in step two."
you can say a miracle occurs.
in the case of galileo, he had two problems when he turned his telescope to saturn.
and this is what he ended up concluding that he saw.
so one of the problems of explaining why people believe weird things is that we have things on a simple level.
faces are important for us socially.
faces of all kinds are easy to see.
i actually went to see this one.
so is it really a miracle of mary, or is it a miracle of marge?
here is the forward -- this is the most famous one of all of these.
and she wrote a beautiful song.
at least she got it close.
now what can we do about this?
but the people in asia are starting to eat like we are, which is why they're starting to get sick like we are.
so i've been working with a lot of the big food companies.
founded on shared ideas and values, tribes give ordinary people the power to lead and make big change.
seth godin on the tribes we lead
but it got me thinking about the fact that these guys, at least most of them, know what it is that they do for a living.
and the other thing about these guys is, they also know what they do for a living.
but what do we do for a living?
what exactly to the people watching this do every day?
and i want to argue that what we do is we try to change everything.
and i want to share a couple stories with you today.
cities gave them a charter to get rid of the stray animals on the street and destroy them.
and everyone said it was impossible.
nathan and his boss went to the city council to get a change in the ordinance.
and nathan went directly to the community.
and then he went to north carolina and did it again.
and when i think about what nathan did, and when i think about what people here do, i think about ideas.
and i think about the idea that creating an idea, spreading an idea has a lot behind it.
it is a moment in time.
and i want to argue that we are living through and are right at the key moment of a change in the way ideas are created and spread and implemented.
and now we're in this new model of leadership, where the way we make change is not by using money or power to lever a system, but by leading.
so let me tell you about the three cycles.
it enables him to hire men who used to get paid 50 cents a day and pay them five dollars a day.
you can make a lot of change.
take a good idea and push it on the world.
if necessary you can put babies in your ads.
if necessary you can use babies to sell other stuff.
this model requires you to act like the king, like the person in the front of the room throwing things to the peons in the back.
i call it the idea of tribes.
people i know who are firemen told me that this is not uncommon.
and that what firemen do to train sometimes is they take a house that is going to be torn down, and they burn it down instead, and practice putting it out.
but they always stop and take a picture.
you can tell when you're running into someone in a tribe.
not because you force them to do something against their will, but because they wanted to connect.
and it becomes something far bigger than ourselves, it becomes a movement.
and he didn't do it by buying a lot of ads.
thousands of people around the country who could give his presentation for him, because he can't be in 100 or 200 or 500 cities in each night.
so some people will go out and get people to be on one team.
and some people will get people to be on the other team.
what would happen if, when you're using your kindle, you could see the comments and quotes and notes from all the other people reading the same book as you in that moment.
but let me just try a couple.
what all these people have in common is that they are heretics.
i am willing to stand up and be counted and move things forward.
you just need a few people -- -- who will look at the rules, realize they make no sense, and realize how much they want to be connected.
but if i can get other people to join my climb and ride, then together we can get something that we all want.
she doesn't do it by quietly building one house at a time.
she does it by telling a story to people who want to hear it.
and around and around and around it goes.
"what would happen if every time someone bought a pair of these shoes i gave exactly the same pair to someone who doesn't even own a pair of shoes?"
so here is what leaders have in common.
do you know what people want more than anything?
they want to be missed the day they don't show up.
and tribe leaders can do that.
being a leader gives you charisma.
they commit to the people who are there.
and i hope you'll think about it before you reject it out-of-hand.
this baby is so tiny he doesn't have enough fat on his body to stay warm.
but the bigger problem is that the ones who do survive grow up with severe, long-term health problems.
the reason is because in the first month of a baby's life, its only job is to grow.
imagine: many of these problems could be prevented if these babies were just kept warm.
what you see here looks nothing like an incubator.
it looks like a small sleeping bag for a baby.
you can open it up completely.
over the next five years we hope to save the lives of almost a million babies.
we tried to understand the root of the problem rather than being biased by what already exists.
because this is my first time at ted, i've decided to bring along an old friend to help break the ice a bit.
i want to show you two examples.
and they look something like this.
she is meant to have the power to look inside people and see the good and bad in everyone.
this is the first time that we want sex over time about pleasure and connection that is rooted in desire.
but now we want our partner to still give us all these things, but in addition i want you to be my best friend and my trusted confidant and my passionate lover to boot, and we live twice as long.
so why does good sex so often fade?
in desire, we want an other, somebody on the other side that we can go visit, that we can go spend some time with, that we can go see what goes on in their red light district.
but then i took a question with me.
but it's also not when the other person is that far apart that you no longer see them.
and so, when i see my partner on his own or her own, doing something in which they are enveloped, i look at this person and i momentarily get a shift in perception, and i stay open to the mysteries that are living right next to me.
i have yet to see somebody who is so turned on by somebody who needs them.
what parts of you are just being seen?
sex is a place you go.
so where do you go in sex?
is it a place for naughtiness and is it a place to be safely aggressive?
is it a place where you can finally surrender and not have to take responsibility for everything?
is it a place where you can express your infantile wishes?
so when i began to think about eroticism, i began to think about the poetics of sex, and if i look at it as an intelligence, then it's something that you cultivate.
those who came back to life were those who understood the erotic as an antidote to death.
they knew how to keep themselves alive.
and so i began to ask a different question.
now, if you are dead inside, the other person can do a lot of things for valentine's.
basically most of us will get turned on at night by the very same things that we will demonstrate against during the day.
but no, in our mind up there are a host of things going on that we don't always know how to bring to the person that we love, because we think love comes with selflessness and in fact desire comes with a certain amount of selfishness in the best sense of the word: the ability to stay connected to one's self in the presence of another.
so i want to draw that little image for you, because this need to reconcile these two sets of needs, we are born with that.
our need for connection, our need for separateness, or our need for security and adventure, or our need for togetherness and for autonomy, and if you think about the little kid who sits on your lap and who is cozily nested here and very secure and comfortable, and at some point all of us need to go out into the world to discover and to explore.
some of us will come back, came back a long time ago, and that little child who comes back is the child who will forgo a part of himself in order not to lose the other.
i will lose my freedom in order not to lose connection.
and i will learn to love in a certain way that will become burdened with extra worry and extra responsibility and extra protection, and i won't know how to leave you in order to go play, in order to go experience pleasure, in order to discover, to enter inside myself.
it continues into our sex lives up to the end.
child number two comes back but looks like that over their shoulder all the time.
are you going to curse me?
are you going to be angry with me?"
and they may be gone, but they're never really away, and those are often the people that will tell you, in the beginning it was super hot.
the more connected i became, the more responsible i felt, the less i was able to let go in your presence.
on the one hand you want the security in order to be able to go.
they also understand that foreplay is not something you do five minutes before the real thing.
but what they know is they know how to resurrect it.
by talking heads) so the nature of the room meant that words could be understood.
the sound system was kind of decent.
but i also noticed that sometimes the music that i had written, or was writing at the time, didn't sound all that great in some of those halls.
is that a kind of model for creativity?
most of the popular music that we know now has a big part of its roots in west africa.
and it would be a mess in a context like this.
this is the room that bach wrote some of his music for.
this is a little bit later.
they had to be very quiet.
so those two things combined meant that a different kind of music worked best in these kind of halls.
quiet parts could be heard that would have been drowned out by all the gossiping and shouting.
well, there's only so many times you can play the same section of a song over and over again for the dancers.
and a new form of music was born.
so the music has to be loud enough to be heard above that.
and this was one way that the music got there.
and this kind of thing would have been impossible without a microphone.
and they no longer have to be exactly the same.
and another new form of music was born.
they did the best they could given that this is what they're writing for.
one of the new ones is the automobile.
the car is a whole venue.
and does it happen anywhere else?
but the pleasure and the passion and the joy is still there.
maybe what the world needs now is for us to realize that we are like the birds.
and like the birds, the joy is still there, even though we have changed what we do to fit the context.
as a clergyman, you can imagine how out of place i feel.
i feel like a fish out of water, or maybe an owl out of the air.
and had such -- it was an eye-opening experience to hear them talk about the world that is yet to come through technology and science.
i know that we're near the end of this conference, and some of you may be wondering why they have a speaker from the field of religion.
and there was a drunk man on there, and he got up out of his seat two or three times, and he was making everybody upset by what he was trying to do.
i know that as you have been peering into the future, and as we've heard some of it here tonight, i would like to live in that age and see what is going to be.
in one generation, the nation of the people of israel had a tremendous and dramatic change that made them a great power in the near east.
a man by the name of david came to the throne, and king david became one of the great leaders of his generation.
he had the favor of god with him.
and in the course of one generation, israel was completely changed.
and david found that there were many problems that technology could not solve.
there were many problems still left.
how do we solve these three problems that i'd like to mention?
the first one that david saw was human evil.
why do we have these wars in every generation, and in every part of the world?
even the most sophisticated among us seem powerless to break this cycle.
our problem is that we are separated from our creator, which we call god, and we need to have our souls restored, something only god can do.
king david said that he knew the depths of his own soul.
and there's something inside of us that is beyond our understanding.
i find [that] young people all over the world are searching for something.
and i'll be asked the same questions that i was asked the last few times i've been there.
even if you have no religious belief, there are times when you wonder that there's something else.
what shall i talk to her about?"
and he surprised me with the answer.
the second problem that king david realized he could not solve was the problem of human suffering.
and when you speak as much as i do, three or four times a day, you get rusty.
i never read a speech or a talk or a lecture.
i've never met a person in the world that didn't have a problem or a worry.
yet david again and again said that he would turn to god.
the final problem that david knew he could not solve was death.
we see people on our screens.
and we have that in common with all these great men of the past that are staring down at us."
i talked to a woman this past week whose father was a famous doctor.
as he came to die, he sat up on the side of the bed one day, and he asked the nurse if he could see the chaplain.
but it does not need to have to be that way.
he put it on a personal basis.
the reality of this life and his resurrection is the hope of mankind."
how should one live in order not to feel regret when one is dying?
pascal came to believe not only the love and the grace of god could bring us back into harmony, but he believed that his own sins and failures could be forgiven, and that when he died he would go to a place called heaven.
but if instead you bet that there is no god, then you can lose it all, in this life and the life to come."
the knowledge of god was far beyond anything that ever crossed his mind.
he was ready to face him when he died at the age of 39.
king david lived to be 70, a long time in his era.
yet he too had to face death, and he wrote these words: "even though i walk through the valley of the shadow of death, i will fear no evil, for you are with me."
it can be yours, as well, as you seek the living god and allow him to fill your life and give you hope for the future.
when i was 17 years of age, i was born and reared on a farm in north carolina.
and there were 20 of them that i had -- that i was responsible for, and i worked on the farm and tried to keep up with my studies.
i had to make that decision.
but by faith i said, i believe him, and he came into my heart and changed my life.
i will not lend my soul nor my bones to your war drum.
i will not dance to that beating.
i will not hate for you or even hate you.
i will not kill for you.
especially i will not die for you.
i will not side with you or dance to bombs because everyone is dancing.
i will not forget where i come from.
i will not lend my name nor my rhythm to your beat.
let me hear you make some noise.
so i am going to read a poem that was chosen just now.
but i'm going to need you to just sit for like 10 minutes and hold a woman who is not here.
i see now, i never was one and not the other.
i think now i never was pure.
one woman gives birth to a baby.
one woman gives birth to borders.
one woman no longer believes love will ever find her.
do not fear what has blown up.
the surprise came at the end.
this is a world-changing problem with huge implications for our ability to understand and treat disease.
the truth is a bit more nuanced.
the result is big data, and it actually presents us with an opportunity to more deeply understand the human condition.
how do i search this data?
the foreign fighters filled them out as they joined the organization.
what i thought i would do is i would start with a simple request.
now that was the advice that st.
it was the advice that i decided to follow myself when i turned 40.
and i decided that i would try and turn my life around.
so i stepped back from the workforce, and i spent a year at home with my wife and four young children.
but all i learned about work-life balance from that year was that i found it quite easy to balance work and life when i didn't have any work.
not a very useful skill, especially when the money runs out.
the third observation is we have to be careful with the time frame that we choose upon which to judge our balance.
meet some mates in the pub for an early evening drink.
how often do you think i have that day?
and i realize that my life is completely out of balance.
and to be balanced, i believe we have to attend to all of those areas -- not just do 50 stomach crunches.
you want me to go to church and call my mother."
i truly understand how that can be daunting.
because she had to be somewhere else with the other three children for that evening.
so i left work an hour early that afternoon and picked harry up at the school gates.
i then walked him up the hill to the local cafe, and we shared a pizza for two, then walked down the hill to our home, and i gave him his bath and put him in his batman pajamas.
now my point is the small things matter.
she turned out to be a much bigger dog than i'd anticipated.
the area also has one of the lowest ratios of parks to people in the city.
and just like my new dog, it was an idea that got bigger than i'd imagined.
we feel the problems right now, and have for some time.
why would someone leave their home to go for a brisk walk in a toxic neighborhood?
poor people are not only still poor; they are still unhealthy.
none of us want that, and we all have that in common.
so what else do we have in common?
these things make me different from you.
but the things we have in common set me apart from most of the people in my community, and i am in between these two worlds, with enough of my heart to fight for justice in the other.
so how did things get so different for us?
and if you are told from your earliest days that nothing good is going to come from your community, that is bad and ugly, how could it not reflect on you?
once we realized that, we decided it was time to do our own planning.
but we have emerged with valuable lessons about how to dig ourselves out.
now listen, i do not expect individuals, corporations or government to make the world a better place because it is right or moral.
that it continues is a shame upon us all, because we are all responsible for the future that we create.
but one of the things i do to remind myself of greater possibilities is to learn from visionaries in other cities.
we have no excuse in this country.
help me make green the new black.
i was making him an offer.
i have come from so far to meet you like this.
then he does something really amazing.
i told you three things last year.
and if i could share the image with you on the screen.
there was a huge difference in the world.
and they go over all this -- i'm going to try to be a little more serious this year in showing you how things really changed.
this is more or less what we saw last year, and this is how it will go on into the future.
because this is where we are.
will it be possible that this will happen?
i expect to live 100 years.
and this is where we are today.
now could we look here instead at the economic situation in the world?
and i would like to show that against child survival.
how they got slowly richer and richer, and they add statistics.
it moves this way over here.
and the bubbles keep moving up there, and this is what the world looks like today.
let us have a look at the united states.
and we can see that the united states goes to the right of the mainstream.
they are on the money side all the time.
but we have to bring united states forward quite a while to find the same health of the united states as we have in the philippines.
and how long do we have to bring united states to get the same health as chile has today?
and we go back to 1920, and i want to look at japan.
and i want to look at sweden and the united states.
we have to look over generations to understand it.
now this looks also like a very good story.
because i have to show you one of the other facilities.
and what happens when we moved on?
there is no one who has done it so far.
from now on we count per capita.
this really shows you, we have not seen good economic and health progress anywhere in the world without destroying the climate.
and this is really what has to be changed.
everyone lives on this street here.
what they earn here -- what number they live on -- is how much they earn per day.
if we look at the bed here, we can see that they sleep on a rug on the floor.
this is two to five dollars.
although there is a sofa, if you watch in the kitchen, you can see that the great difference for women does not come between one to 10 dollars.
and if you really want to see the difference, you look at the toilet over here.
we can get out of poverty.
my own research has not been in it or anything like this.
the nice thing here is that you can't see who are the researchers in this picture.
the women told us one thing.
get us a mill so that we can mill our flour, then we will be able to pay for the rest ourselves."
she wants her kid to be healthy, so she can go to the market and doesn't have to stay home.
and information will tell her when to go to market with which product.
i find my experience from 20 years of africa is that the seemingly impossible is possible.
i would say that sub-saharan africa has done best in the world during the last 50 years.
we have to know a little more about the world.
but i have to get serious.
and how do you get serious?
health is also important, but not that much as a mean.
human rights is also important, but it just gets one cross.
we are not interested in money.
but where are the important goals?
we can have a good world.
i showed you the shots, i proved it in the powerpoint, and i think i will convince you also by culture.
the bar is called the miracle of science.
and so we started to work on this problem.
the next step would be to put this molecule into mice.
and so we did just the opposite.
we told people exactly how to make it.
you might know that fat has memory.
i want to leave you with just two ideas.
now the business model involves all of you.
you walk up and down the river.
and so i want to thank you for your participation, your collaboration and most of all for your confidence in our ideas.
which tells you something about our place in the universe.
but we would also like to understand it.
if you looked at one of these galaxies and measured its velocity, it would be moving away from you.
and if you look at a galaxy even farther away, it would be moving away faster.
that kind of makes sense to us.
the air in this room is very smooth.
the gravitational pull of things was a lot stronger near the big bang.
and you have to imagine doing that squeezing without any imperfections, without any little spots where there were a few more atoms than somewhere else.
there is something that made it that way.
we would like to know what.
every difference that there is between the past and the future is because entropy is increasing -- the fact that you can remember the past, but not the future.
one of the people who did understand that this was a problem was richard feynman.
if you come back a billion years later and look at it again, it will be moving away faster.
so what this means is that the universe is like a box of gas that lasts forever.
it's not something you have to worry about -- the air in this room all gathering over one part of the room and suffocating us.
except if they locked the doors and kept us here literally forever, that would happen.
but there will also be large fluctuations.
maybe our universe is just one of those things that happens from time to time.
if our order were due to a fluctuation, we would not expect order anywhere but where we have just noticed it.
the question is then what is the right answer?
i just showed you this picture.
but we now know enough about the future of the universe to say a lot more.
they will fall into black holes.
we will live in a universe with nothing in it but black holes.
the future is much longer than the past.
they will evaporate, and we will be left with nothing but empty space.
they all happen over a period of time equal to 10 to the 10 to the 120 years.
this is a brute fact about the universe that you should learn to accept and stop asking questions.
or maybe the big bang is not the beginning of the universe.
so the organizers asked me to end with a bold speculation.
we will all believe that our little universe is just a small part of a much larger multiverse.
but we've been thinking as a human race about what the universe was like, why it came to be in the way it did for many, many years.
it's exciting to think we may finally know the answer someday.
before that time, i had never been away from my home in malawi.
i had never used a computer.
i had never seen an internet.
i had never been surrounded by so many azungu, white people.
i would like to share that story today.
we have seven children in my family.
this is me with my dad when i was a little boy.
i looked at my father and looked at those dry fields.
i felt very happy to be at the secondary school, so i was determined to do anything possible to receive education.
so i went to a library.
another book put that knowledge in my hands.
it was one light at first.
i could not get rid of them.
i had never slept in a hotel.
so i would like to say something to all the people out there like me to the africans, and the poor who are struggling with your dreams.
maybe one day you will watch this on the internet.
there are an enormous number of them that we use every day.
it comes as a part of our everyday learning.
rather than using it for my computer, i actually opened it.
in another exploration, i thought of making a pen that can draw in three dimensions.
a coffee cup will show where you can find more coffee, or where you can trash the cup.
among all these experiments, there was one thing in common: i was trying to bring a part of the physical world to the digital world.
but then i realized that we humans are not actually interested in computing.
what we are interested in is information.
we want to know about things.
why can i not remove this confine and take that to my everyday objects, everyday life so that i don't need to learn the new language for interacting with those pixels?
but the most interesting thing about this particular technology is that you can carry your digital world with you wherever you go.
we are giving you the freedom of using all of both of your hands, so you can actually use both of your hands to zoom into or zoom out of a map just by pinching all present.
but i'm more excited that you can actually take it outside.
and i think the imagination is the only limit of what you can think of when this kind of technology merges with real life.
but many of you argue, actually, that all of our work is not only about physical objects.
so now the sound of the touch is getting me when exactly i'm touching the paper.
you can of course watch movies.
and you can of course play games.
we can just play with papers.
and it will actually help us not end up being machines sitting in front of other machines.
what are you doing with this?
this technology can be used for them to speak out in a different way with maybe a speaker system."
are you staying at mit, or are you going to do something with this?
how are you going to split your time going forward?
all of this work that you have seen is all about my learning in india.
an account that explains the presence of beauty in everything on this list is not going to be easy.
i can, however, give you at least a taste of what i regard as the most powerful theory of beauty we yet have.
how can we explain this universality?
it would hardly do to eat your baby or your lover.
we find beauty in something done well.
your distant ancestors loved that shape and found beauty in the skill needed to make it, even before they could put their love into words.
is beauty in the eye of the beholder?
and the answer i like to offer is what they typically do is they think about the future of wars in the context of war.
the material i'm going to show you is one idea from a book with a lot of ideas.
i'm going to present a problem and try to give you an answer.
why do we call it that?
that's how distant we are from even meeting an air force willing to fly against ours.
we did it so fast we weren't prepared for their collapse.
what we need to build is a force for the everything else.
i call them the system administrators.
what i think this really represents is lack of an a to z rule set for the world as a whole for processing politically bankrupt states.
we argue about it every time we use it.
what would an a to z system look like?
they can write it on a piece of paper.
everybody's got to answer their grandchildren some day what you did about the holocaust in africa, and you better have an answer.
they love to put them on trial.
talk to anybody who was over there in the first six months.
and then they turned on us.
because they just got fed up.
they saw what we did to saddam.
where are we going to find this guy?
they're going to decide up front how the money gets spent just like in the imf.
we did it just like that.
would you like a better system?
this is why it matters to the military.
the split starts to emerge between those in the military who see a future they can live with, and those who see a future that starts to scare them, like the u.s.
so we were home alone for eight years.
and what did we do home alone?
can you come back next year and remind us again?"
some people put these two things together and they call it empire, which i think is a boneheaded concept.
certain bad things you cannot do.
how this impacts the way we think about the future of war.
we talked about this going all the way back to the end of the cold war.
what do i mean by these two different forces?
this is the military the rest of the world wants us to build.
it's why i travel all over the world talking to foreign militaries.
it means you've got to stop pretending you can do these two very disparate skill sets with the same 19-year-old.
that force on the right is more like a 40-year-old cop.
the rule is going to be this.
that sys admin force is the force that never comes home, does most of your work.
don't plan for the war unless you plan to win the peace.
the force on the left is never coming under the purview of the international criminal court.
do we need a bigger budget?
i have been to the mountain top.
and this is when they think about beating the crap out of me after the talk.
they get up every morning, they want to dig a hole and they want to kill something.
i want them to be marines.
it keeps it from being the u.n.
i call it the smart dust navy.
but you need lots of these guys on the ground to win the peace.
so it's better off to have them make some mistakes along the way than to see that.
how are you going to get them to work for this force?
this is about being up front with these guys and gals.
take a gift in the left hand.
so before i talk about this car for the blind, let me briefly tell you about another project that i worked on called the darpa urban challenge.
so we had to throw everything out the window and start from scratch.
and in the summer of 2009, we invited dozens of blind youth from all over the country and gave them a chance to take it for a spin.
but the problem is this: how do we convey this information and instructions to a person who cannot see fast enough and accurate enough so he can drive?
so even though you are blind, you can put your hand over it, you can see the lanes of the road and obstacles.
well there comes the first box.
mark's going to give me a ride back to the hotel.
you must be out of your mind."
and i truly believe that this can happen.
what i remember today from this is that objects tell stories, so storytelling has been a really strong influence in my work.
and then there was another influence.
i was a teenager, and at 15 or 16, i guess like all teenagers, we want to just do what we love and what we believe in.
it was really a death trap.
and i realized then i had to go to design school.
and i saw something extraordinary happening in silicon valley, so i wanted to be there, and i saw that the computer was coming into our homes, that it had to change in order to be with us in our homes.
do they want it in their homes?"
and what i wanted to work on is important stuff.
and i wanted to really not just work on the skins, but i wanted to work on the entire human experience.
and so the first projects were sort of humble, but they took technology and maybe made it into things that people would use in a new way, and maybe finding some new functionality.
it allows the person to switch, and to mix these two colorations.
this is the board, this is one of the things that goes inside that makes this technology work.
we can continue to work and dedicate ourselves to this project, and then we also share in the rewards.
so we called it y water.
this girl is going to school with a laptop on her head.
he wanted to bring education and he wanted to bring technology, and those are pillars of his life, but also pillars of the mission of one laptop per child.
but what he said was really significant, is that design was going to be why the kids were going to love this product, how we were going to make it low cost, robust.
i mean, they fought like animals for this to remain they way it is.
and i think this is something really important.
and a month and a half later, i come back to switzerland, and there he is playing with his own version.
some of you might have heard about the new york city condom.
it's a little bit like designing a fire hydrant, and it has to be easily serviceable: you have to know where it is and what it does.
he talks about what such life would be like -- and how we might find it.
how will we be remembered in 200 years?
i wanted to just talk for one minute about the future of biotechnology, because i think i know very little about that -- i'm not a biologist -- so everything i know about it can be said in one minute.
and that has to happen with biotech.
that will blow away a lot of the opposition.
i want to talk about something quite different, which is what i know about, and that is astronomy.
and the step from the ocean to the land was not easy, but it happened.
it is out in the cold, but it still could have come.
what would they need in order to grow on the surface?
so they would have to have something like a reptilian skin.
they could enjoy all the benefits of the sunlight and have roots going down into the ocean; life then could flourish much more.
since there was nothing there, you might as well not look.
there is something called pit lamping.
you strap it onto your forehead, so you can see the reflection in the eyes of the animal.
so i have proposed to apply the same trick to looking for life in the universe.
you still are on a piece of ice, you can still have sunlight and you can still survive while you're traveling from one place to another.
and then if you run into another object, you can stay there and colonize the other object.
they have to be all the time pointing toward the sun, and they will be able to spread out in space, because gravity on these objects is weak.
that would be a fun thing to do.
in the long run, of course, it would also make it possible for us to move out there.
and if life is already there, it makes it much more exciting, in the short run.
so again, we have a big and wonderful future to look forward.
i am interested in how women are saving us.
is it different women who are doing the preserving and the radicalizing?
or are they one and the same?
much of my life has been a quest to get some answers to these questions.
they made her wear a white one.
her daughter, rani, a few years older than me, sat in her lap bewildered, not knowing what had happened to the confident woman she once knew as her mother.
that's the night i learned the rules about what it means to be female in this world.
my father, who had fought in three wars, could not save his own sister from this suffering.
she walked into my office at a time when no one knew where afghanistan was in the united states.
the prophet wanted every believer to be able to read the koran for themselves."
she always wears a headscarf, but i've walked alongside with her on a beach with her long hair flying in the breeze.
when i had to open the school in the refugee camp, i went to see the imam.
he began to come twice a week to my center because women could not go to the mosque.
and after he would leave, women and girls would stay behind.
sakena is a teacher at a time when to educate women is a dangerous business in afghanistan.
i worry about her every time she travels across that country.
look at those young girls who go back to school when acid is thrown in their face."
so enter a group of out dykes, young women who love the old music that once spread across that region from macedonia to bosnia, from serbia to slovenia.
many have struggled to come out to their communities, in families whose religious beliefs make it hard to accept that their daughters are not sick, just queer.
i also like rock and roll.
but she was sick with worry: she worried her son would be abducted and taken off to be a child soldier, she worried her daughters would be raped, she worried for their lives.
she dreamt she and thousands of other women ended the bloodshed.
the next morning at church, she asked others how they felt.
they were all tired of the fighting.
we need peace, and we need our leaders to know we will not rest until there is peace.
at the next friday sermon, the women who were sitting in the side room of the mosque began to share their distress at the state of affairs.
this small group of women, determined to bring an end to the war, and they chose to use their traditions to make a point: liberian women usually wear lots of jewelry and colorful clothing.
the peace talks dragged on and on and on.
with their remaining funds, they took a small group of women down to the venue of the peace talks and they surrounded the building.
we were not going to leave until the peace accord was signed."
with heat from the bottom and heat from the top."
but we also need the heat from the top.
and in most parts of the world, that top is still controlled by men.
they have to subvert tradition that once silenced them in order to give voice to new aspirations.
and perhaps this is the ultimate gift of feminism, that the personal is in fact the political.
and she is definitely on her way.
so when she felt herself bottom into depression after college, she did what felt natural -- she wrote love letters and left them for strangers to find.
i was one of the only kids in college who had a reason to go to the p.o.
and so when i moved to new york city after college and got completely sucker-punched in the face by depression, i did the only thing i could think of at the time.
but, you know, the thing that always gets me about these letters is that most of them have been written by people that have never known themselves loved on a piece of paper.
they could not tell you about the ink of their own love letters.
they're the ones from my generation, the ones of us that have grown up into a world where everything is paperless, and where some of our best conversations have happened upon a screen.
and so i could tell you about a woman whose husband has just come home from afghanistan, and she is having a hard time unearthing this thing called conversation, and so she tucks love letters throughout the house as a way to say, "come back to me.
or the man who decides that he is going to take his life, uses facebook as a way to say goodbye to friends and family.
we still clutch close these letters to our chest, to the words that speak louder than loud, when we turn pages into palettes to say the things that we have needed to say, the words that we have needed to write, to sisters and brothers and even to strangers, for far too long.
now what would this mean, and how would we do it?
so how are we doing this in the lab?
but perhaps for me the core bit going into the future is this idea of taking your own stem cells, with your genes and your environment, and you print your own personal medicine.
and if you wonder why this is interesting at all, you have to see the rest of saudi arabia because it's a country which is strictly divided between the sexes.
and i went there -- i noticed that there was a male section, which was carefully separated from the female section.
and i had to pay, order and eat at the male section.
and actually this is just one example of a much larger phenomenon.
maybe some things are bad traditions and they need to be changed.
it was there for thousands of years.
now these are some of the questions i had in mind a few years ago when i sat down to write a book.
there is no punishment on apostasy.
there is no punishment on personal things like drinking.
now if i were the only person thinking that way, we would be in trouble.
and in my book, i went into that question as well.
they did not share the same anti-colonial hype that you can find in some other countries in the region.
that's an experience that not every other muslim nation in the middle east had until very recently.
we are muslim believers, but we want to be living as free people in free societies."
they just should be allowed to work for that.
and one of those i'd like to share with you today.
going down there was like entering a time capsule, and i came out with a different sense of myself in time.
it learned to move and began to see.
the first eyes grew on trilobites.
it took time for life to break away from water, and it still beckons all the time.
one early form left an imprint, like it died only yesterday.
a trick shared by the largest flower on earth.
there are many ways to be a mammal.
life is a force in its own right.
it covers earth like a skin.
and you all here today can imagine and will shape where we go next.
yet, not only is there at least some good news to be told about fewer such conflicts now than two decades ago, but what is perhaps more important is that we also have come to a much better understanding of what can be done to further reduce the number of ethnic conflicts and civil wars and the suffering that they inflict.
what i will focus on in my talk is why they matter, how they matter, and what we can all do to make sure that they continue to matter in the right ways, that is, how all of us can contribute to developing and honing the skills of local and global leaders to make peace and to make it last.
but hang on, this talk is to be about the good news.
the number of people killed in civil wars also is much lower today than it was a decade ago or two.
what is also important is to note that these figures only tell part of the story.
in some cases, there is a military victory of one side.
a cold war is not as good as a cold peace, but a cold peace is still better than a hot war.
good news is also about learning the right lesson.
both successes and failures teach us several critically important things that we need to bear in mind if we want the good news to continue.
leaders need to connect to each other and to their followers, and they need to bring them along on what is an often arduous journey into a peaceful future.
and they need to think about the substance of their agreement much more than about the labels they want to attach to them.
leaders, in other words, that people will trust and that they will want to follow even if that means making hard choices.
i met benki three years ago in sao paulo when i'd brought him and other leaders from indigenous peoples to meet with me and leaders from around the world, because we wanted to learn from each other.
we wanted to share our stories with each other.
he could see what was happening to his forest, to his environment, because he was taken under his grandfather's wing when he was only two years old to begin to learn about the forest and the way of life of his people.
his grandfather died when he was only 10.
so when he was only 10 and he became the paje, he began to lead his people.
he began to talk to them about the forest that they needed to protect, the way of life they needed to nurture.
he explained to them that it was not a question of survival of the fittest; it was a question of understanding what they needed to survive and to protect that.
and he went because he hoped the world would listen.
why are you putting yourself at risk?
so when i think of that, i wonder what our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren, when they ask themselves that question, i wonder how they will answer.
we know we are running out of what we need.
and we know that there will be more of us than ever before -- five times as many people in 40 years than 60 years ago.
we are running out of what we need.
things are bad enough as they are."
we need new models of what it means to be a leader.
we need new models of being a leader and a human in the world.
i started life as a banker.
my work has taken me around the world, where i've had the real privilege of meeting people like benki and many others who are making change happen in their communities -- people who see the world differently, who are asking different questions, who have different answers, who understand the filters that they wear when they go out into the world.
but she realized that she was much too detached from the world doing that.
sanghamitra told me just last week -- she had just come back from two weeks in the villages, and she had a real breakthrough.
they were sitting in a circle, talking about the dreams for the village.
our dream is for our partners, our husbands, not to be given to us because of a horoscope, but to be given to us because they've been tested for hiv."
he was born in 1957, and you can imagine what his childhood looked like and felt like, and what his life has been like over the last 50 tumultuous years.
i was lucky; i had heard about him for years, and i finally met him earlier this year at his museum in chengdu.
he's been a collector all of his life, starting when he was four or five in the early 1960's.
why did he do all this?
because he thought a nation should never repeat the mistakes of the past.
these people inspire me, and they inspire me because they show us what is possible when you change the way you look at the world, change the way you look at your place in the world.
they looked outside, and then they changed what was on the inside.
they have a sense of the great arc of time and their tiny place in it.
they know people have come before them and will follow them.
we know it takes a lot to make it happen, and we know the direction the world is going in.
we can't wait for the next generation, the new joiners, to come in and learn how to be the good leaders we need.
i think it has to start with us.
we can change the way we see ourselves in the world.
the two brothers one day decided to go on a race, three times around the world.
and so, when you study it, you realize that different people of the world have a different understanding of the world.
or perhaps he was just a yogi who was sitting on a rock, staring at the sky and the sun and the moon.
each one thought that the other was a fool.
what a waste of a life."
you should not be sisyphus, who rolls a rock up a mountain all day only to find the boulder rolled down at night.
he heard a very different story.
and then he went to the top-most peak of the greatest mountain of the center of the world called meru.
you see, the indians also had a river that separates the land of the living from the land of the dead.
you go again and again and again.
and what do you do at the end of 10 days?
what goes around always comes around, and this rule applies not just to man, but also the gods.
you see, the gods have to come back again and again and again as ram, as krishna.
two different mythologies, two different ways of looking at the world.
one believes this is the one and only life.
the other believes this is one of many lives.
and if you look at cultures around the world, all you have to do is understand the mythology and you will see how they behave and how they do business.
i did not want to study surgery.
how do you put it in a nice little software?
and there are more than 200 formats, across 50 cities and towns of india.
so, there is nothing right or wrong in what you do in life.
he realizes that to succeed, he does not have to be a "professional," he does not have to cut out his emotions, he has to include all these people in his world to succeed, to make them happy, to make the boss happy, to make everyone happy.
so, then we come back to alexander and to the gymnosophist.
and i am not paid by t-mobile.
i don't know why my wife says i never listen to her.
so what i mean is that you can start a call in your house in the wi-fi hotspot, you can get in your car and talk until the battery's dead -- which would be like 10 minutes -- and the call will continue to be free.
it also works the other way.
which is why most people with this service get into the habit of saying, "hey, i just got home.
can i call you right back?"
you can make free unlimited calls home to the us with these phones.
would you call me please right now?
thank you very much for doing that.
everyone wants in on the action.
the beauty of that is you never miss a call.
but the beauty is it's all going through the internet, so you get all of these really cool features -- like you can say, i want these people to be able to call me only during these hours.
and then in five seconds, they send you back the complete weather forecast for that town.
and those are just the beginning.
why do i listen to people in the audience?
this you can ask by voice any question.
i tried this this morning just to make sure it's still alive.
and then i was trying to pretend i was like a valley girl.
how can it be so good?
it's as though there is a human being on the other end of the line."
of course i want to listen to the messages!
so now i'm going to tell you how to get out of that.
the reason i think that is that on the first day i tried one of these services, i got two voicemail messages.
this is me testing it out.
hey, i was walking along the street and the sky was blue.
so they give you a choice of what you want to hear on the other end.
it was when in the fall of 2006, i explained why apple would never do a cellphone.
i know the people who worked on the treo.
you can see what i said about it.
but it did change a few things.
the first thing it changed was that all those carriers saw that they sold 10 million of these things in a year.
but the other thing it did is it opened up this idea of an app store.
they have every language in the world.
a song is running through your head -- you sing it into the thing: do do do do do, da da da da da da, da dum ...
it will immediately play you that song or that band.
you say if you like this song or not.
over time it tailors the songs so that it completely stops playing bad songs.
you want to find a place to eat.
this is a song i did for the new york times website as a music video.
and now the end is near.
i too will join the cult.
i want to touch its precious screen.
i want my friends to look and drool.
i will do my best this morning to tell you what i think is the truth.
what i am is a doctor of internal medicine who became passionately interested in this topic about 10 years ago when a patient asked me a question.
but that very fact is telling.
but what else could i offer her?
now gamma imaging has been around for a long time to image the heart, and it had even been tried to image the breast.
and i started talking to him about this problem with breast density, and we realized that we might be able to get this detector close enough around the breast to actually find small tumors.
this is an image from our first patient.
to say that we faced high doses of skepticism in those early years is just a huge understatement, but we were so convinced that we might be able to make this work that we chipped away with incremental modifications to this system.
and you can see that it looks a lot different.
our big break came in 2004.
but you can understand why there may be forces in the breast-imaging world who prefer the status quo.
we still need to complete the screening study using the low dose, and then our findings will need to be replicated at other institutions, and this could take five or more years.
the babies that we were carrying when my patient first asked me this question are now both in middle school, and the answer has been so slow to come.
she's given me her blessing to share this story with you.
what could be our real needs?
and you know all those kind of sound puts us in a kind of stressful state, and prevent us from being quiet and focused.
so i worked with white noise.
and this noise is the most neutral.
it is the perfect sound for our ears and our brain.
so when you hear this sound you feel like a kind of shelter, preserved from noise pollution.
if you make some noise you can feel the effect.
so this object is supposed to be displayed on your desk, or on your piano, where you are supposed to spend most of your time in the day.
and this object will be able to know exactly the quantity of light you receive during the day, and able to give you the quantity of light you need.
you have to know that the lack of daylight can provoke some problem of energy, or problem of libido.
i just do that to make money.
so we took too many of them.
and its purpose is to help patient to go to the end of the treatment.
and here you can get the white core.
so when a passive object like this one seems to be alive, because it is starting to move.
so the living benches would be exactly like the ball.
and john was so excited by this idea.
i remember the day of the opening.
i was a little bit late.
and it was singing all day long.
and when it stops it means that it just died.
and this is exactly the same at home.
and this one is very toxic.
but the idea is to force the air to go in the effective part of the plants.
because the roots of the plant are not very effective.
so this is the final object.
so the idea of this object is to be able to get at home very local food.
local river is able to provide you food directly in your living room.
after that you have two options.
or you sit down in front of it like you would do in front your tv set.
because you can grow some potatoes.
now we can be treated by smart medicine.
i wanted to create a perfect place where you can work and play, and where your body and your brain can work together.
in this office you do not need to go out in order to be in contact with nature.
i never show it to my client.
all of us need to be considered according to our real nature.
that is the word that comes to mind.
we have a lot of data, so we have a lot of power.
how much power do we have?
that's the kind of power we have because of all of the data that we have.
those are the kinds of things we can do with the data that we have.
but i'm not actually here to talk about what we can do.
we want the people building the technology thinking about what we should be doing with the technology.
so we can protect ourselves if he was up to no good?
should we be collecting all of that guy's data to make his experiences better and to protect ourselves in case he's up to no good?
or should we leave him alone?
how do we know what to do with all the power we have if we don't have a moral framework?
you feel good when you do something right, you feel bad when you do something wrong.
maybe we just follow our gut.
and maybe, if we want to be on surer footing, what we really want is a moral framework that will help guide us there, that will tell us what kinds of things are right and wrong in the first place, and how would we know in a given situation what to do.
you were sleeping during that class.
he was worried about right and wrong.
he wanted to know what is just.
but he was worried that all we seem to be doing is trading opinions about this.
she says something else is just.
i want to know the truth about justice -- like we have truths in math.
what if there were a pure form of justice?
what if there are truths about justice, and you could just look around in this world and see which things participated, partook of that form of justice?
then you would know what was really just and what wasn't.
it wouldn't be a matter of just opinion or just appearances.
he thought ethics was a matter of making decisions in the here-and-now using our best judgment to find the right path.
then we know what to do.
he said we should use our reason to figure out the rules by which we should guide our conduct, and then it is our duty to follow those rules.
how should we be making our decisions?
you can't just take human thinking and put it into a machine.
and the response to that is that we demand the exercise of thinking from every sane person.
every person in this room do this: think of the last time you had a decision to make where you were worried to do the right thing, where you wondered, "what should i be doing?"
or now we have a few more choices.
it is so important we are going to spend 30 seconds of valuable tedtalk time doing nothing but thinking about this.
go find a friend and explain to them how you made that decision.
because they think about problems differently than we do as technologists.
and they gathered together because the technologists wanted to learn what it would be like to think from a humanities perspective.
so imagine that right now you went and you found your musician friend.
and we care about right and wrong.
we care what happens in that opera.
and we certainly care what happens with our technologies.
and your boss can kill you.
so there are three things i want to do.
it was something that -- it's just there were limits to how powerful and important you could be if you had to live at home with your mother.
and it was a perfect drug.
and for the people who were there running the gang, it was a great way, seemingly, to make a lot of money.
at least for the people in the top.
so this is where we enter the picture.
but he hears some voices up in the stairwell, so he climbs up the stairwell.
you don't like to be surprised by people who come around the corner.
i had so much fun hanging out with you last night, i wonder if i could do it again tonight."
what do we find in the gang?
we got an inside look at the gang, from the very bottom up to the very top.
and we not only could study them, but we could ask them questions about what was in them.
so if i have to kind of summarize very quickly in the short time i have what the sort of bottom line of what i take away from the gang is, is that if i had to draw a parallel between the gang and any other organization, it would be that the gang is just like mcdonald's.
but they had seen movies like "wall street," and they kind of had learned a little bit about what it was like to be in the real world.
and they're the ones who basically make the profit or lose a profit, depending on how good they are at running the business.
and important to note that almost all of the weight, all of the people in this organization are at the bottom.
so in some sense, the foot soldiers are a lot like the people who are taking your order at mcdonald's.
there was very little money in the gang, especially at the bottom.
and that, in some ways, was the best job you could hope to get if you were growing up in one of these neighborhoods as a young black male.
this was the best way out.
the money looks about the same.
why is it such a bad job?
that is about as high as you can get.
so in some very literal way, the young black men who were growing up in this country were living in a war zone, very much in the sense of the way that the soldiers over in iraq are fighting in a war.
i think the first one is that they got fooled by history.
they never passed on any of the wealth.
and really, they did all sorts of things to trick the young people into thinking what a great deal the gang was going to be.
it's why we think garbage men might be paid more than people who work in parks, ok?
so in the words of one of the members of the gang i think makes this clear.
and the words of a gang member capture it quite nicely.
so if i going to be asked to put my life on the line, then front me the cash, man."
no matter how bad it was economically, he always got himself paid.
if you start taking losses, they see you as weak and shit."
from there i started with skydiving.
and as you see the fall rate is much much slower because of the bigger surface.
with a proper body position i'm able to really move forward to gain quite some distance.
from there with all the skills and knowledge from paragliding and all the different disciplines in skydiving, i went on to base jumping.
so in summer 2000 i was the first to base jump the eiger north face in switzerland.
so with all this knowledge, i also wanted to get into stunts.
so with some friends we started to do different tricks, like for example this jump here, i jumped from a paraglider.
you need to have the best possible equipment.
and all this to come as close as possible to the human dream of being able to fly.
for my second project, i have a sensational idea of a jump that never has been done before.
i think we all might have some questions.
question one: so does that actually feel the way the flying dream does?
because it looks like it might.
well we will watch this space.
but i have two more questions.
what do you do to to cover your face?
because i just keep thinking of going that fast and having your whole face smushed backwards.
so you have to be prepared.
and what happens is that people, they start to see themselves in this space.
she wasn't really sure whether she was seeing herself or not.
how do we know that being in a space makes a difference?
"does it matter if i am in the world or not?"
"and does it matter whether the kind of actions i take filter into a sense of responsibility?"
and the water flows through the city with time.
the water has an ability to make the city negotiable, tangible.
negotiable meaning that it makes a difference whether you do something or not.
the idea that art can actually evaluate the relationship between what it means to be in a picture, and what it means to be in a space.
the difference between thinking and doing.
this summer, in new york: there is one thing about falling water which is very much about the time it takes for water to fall.
and as you come to a new valley, as you come to a new landscape, you have a certain view.
the moment you start to move, the mountain starts to move.
and your body somehow knows that.
so this means a waterfall is a way of measuring space.
of course being an iconic city like new york, that has had an interest in somehow playing around with the sense of space, you could say that new york wants to seem as big as possible.
so it was not just necessarily about putting nature into the cities.
it was also about giving the city a sense of dimension.
and why would we want to do that?
because i think it makes a difference whether you have a body that feels a part of a space, rather than having a body which is just in front of a picture.
is there a sense of consequences?
so if i have a sense of the space, if i feel that the space is tangible, if i feel there is time, if there is a dimension i could call time, i also feel that i can change the space.
so what is between thinking and doing?
having an experience is taking part in the world.
taking part in the world is really about sharing responsibility.
every fish that gets away grows with every telling of the tale.
i was one of the three scientists on this expedition that took place last summer off japan.
but i also felt like i saw more animals working with the tiburon than the ventana, two vehicles with the same field of view but different propulsion systems.
so my suspicion was that it might have something to do with the amount of noise they make.
so i set up a hydrophone on the bottom of the ocean, and i had each of these fly by at the same speed and distance and recorded the sound they made.
how could something that big live in our ocean and yet remain unfilmed until now?
he should have been with us for this adventure.
and this book was one of the most famous books in america for about 35 years.
he went there after the death of his wife of smallpox and brought his two young children.
he burned all his poetry at the age of 24 and then did not write another poem for at least seven years because he couldn't rectify the life of a poet with the life of a priest.
it is to explain death to a child, and it deserves a piece of plain-song music."
everyone that blew my mind this week.
just bring it down a little.
only the best ones can survive.
and quite often we sit in a design meeting and we discover that there is this great idea.
but for another client in another culture, it could really be the right answer to a different question.
you never know when you might need it.
in fact he looked like a building we had designed for a hotel in the north of sweden.
and he said, "shanghai is the city in the world with most skyscrapers," but to him it was as if the connection to the roots had been cut over.
the great wall is the only thing that can be seen from the moon.
and it sort of shows the difference between these two cities.
we have a free system of bicycles called the city bike that you can borrow if you visit the city.
so quite often you load water for ballast.
and to our surprise we got one of our boards back with corrections from the chinese state censorship.
they tried to pass a law against moving the mermaid.
and then at 11 o'clock they stopped talking about these little issues.
so the second story that i'd like to tell is, actually starts in my own house.
trying to zigzag it to make sure that all of the apartments look at the straight views, instead of into each other.
and he said that he was going to do an apartment block next to a parking structure.
if you go even further, it turns into this green garden.
and all the rainwater that drops on the mountain is actually accumulated.
this was the director of the bank when he was still smiling.
it was in the middle of the capital so we were really excited by this opportunity.
we took him to see the mountain.
and he got very excited by this idea that you could actually make mountains out of architecture, because azerbaijan is known as the alps of central asia.
so he asked us if we could actually imagine an urban master plan on an island outside the capital that would recreate the silhouette of the seven most significant mountains of azerbaijan.
we quite often make little movies.
we always argue a lot about the soundtrack, but in this case it was really easy to choose the song.
and what makes it interesting is that the island right now is just a piece of desert.
with a little luck and some more evolution, maybe in 10 years it could be the five mountains on mars.
but i am going talk about: what are the big problems in the world?
and i must say, before i go on, i should ask every one of you to try and get out pen and paper because i'm actually going to ask you to help me to look at how we do that.
so get out your pen and paper.
bottom line is, there is a lot of problems out there in the world.
the lists go on and on.
that was actually the problem that was asked in davos in january.
surely the biggest problem we have in the world is that we all die.
and that would be -- of course that gets a little more complicated.
the point that i would like to ask you to try to do, is just in 30 seconds -- and i know this is in a sense an impossible task -- write down what you think is probably some of the top priorities.
what should be at the bottom of the list?
of course, you have to ask yourself, why on earth was such a list never done before?
but every organization would also hate to be not on the top of the list.
and since there are many more not-number-one spots on the list than there is number ones, it makes perfect sense not to want to do such a list.
for almost 60 years, yet we've never actually made a fundamental list of all the big things that we can do in the world, and said, which of them should we do first?
we have not had an idea.
what will be the cost and what will be the benefit of that?
what should we do about it, and what will be the outcome?
if you want to know about climate, you ask a climatologist.
but if you want to know which of the two you should deal with first, you can't ask either of them, because that's not what they do.
they make that in some ways disgusting task of saying, which one should we do first, and which one should we do afterwards?
so this is the list, and this is the one i'd like to share with you.
as you might see the bottom of the list was climate change.
why is it it came up?
but it's saying that what we can do about it is very little, at a very high cost.
yet it would do very little good.
all models show it will postpone warming for about six years in 2100.
and just to give you a sense of reference, the u.n.
so we have to ask ourselves, do we want to spend twice the amount on doing very little good?
or half the amount on doing an amazing amount of good?
and that is really why it becomes a bad project.
again, what it tells us is suddenly we start thinking about both sides of the equation.
so i'd like to show you the top four priorities which should be at least the first ones that we deal with when we talk about how we should deal with the problems in the world.
this third best one was free trade.
that would be the third best thing we could do.
that would be the second best investment that we could do.
again, what this does and what it focuses on is saying there are two very different ways that we can deal with hiv/aids.
but in a world where we don't do either, or don't do it very well, we have to at least ask ourselves where should we invest first.
basically for the amount of money that we spend, we can do x amount of good in treatment, and 10 times as much good in prevention.
what this really does is that it makes us think about our priorities.
or did you get close to what we came up with here?
i find a lot of people find it very, very unlikely that we should do that.
there are many problems out there in the world.
the ones where we can do a lot of good rather than a little good.
much more likely, they will be two to four times richer than we are.
so i think that really does tell us why it is we need to get our priorities straight.
to make sure that we realize it's not about making us feel good.
it's not about making things that have the most media attention, but it's about making places where we can actually do the most good.
so the real issue here is to get ourselves back and think about what are the right priorities.
i should just mention briefly, is this really the right list that we got out?
so we actually invited 80 young people from all over the world to come and solve the same problem.
they had all the same material but they could go vastly outside the scope of discussion, and they certainly did, to come up with their own lists.
they all come out with very much the same list.
and that gives me great hope, really, in saying that i do believe that there is a path ahead to get us to start thinking about priorities, and saying, what is the important thing in the world?
but if we don't do it, then we can start thinking about where should we start?
if we worry too much about some things, we end by not worrying about other things.
so i hope this will help us make better priorities, and think about how we better work for the world.
i spent the best part of last year working on a documentary about my own happiness -- trying to see if i can actually train my mind in a particular way, like i can train my body, so i can end up with an improved feeling of overall well-being.
we can see the first part here was designed here by pigs.
so we trained them to be able to do three separate words, to lay out them properly.
so this is us climbing onto the trees and putting it up over the sayan valley in indonesia.
black people are just as happy as white people are.
so now the woman on the right is actually much happier than the guy on the left -- meaning that, if you have a lot of friends, and you have meaningful friendships, that does make a lot of difference.
as well as being married -- you are likely to be much happier than if you are single.
if i would have been born a hundred years earlier, the big decisions in my life would have been made for me -- meaning i would have stayed in the town that i was born in; i would have very much likely entered the same profession that my dad did; and i would have very much likely married a woman that my mom had selected.
we live where we want to be -- at least in the west.
we become what we really are interested in.
we choose our own profession, and we choose our own partners.
and so it's quite surprising that many of us let our unconscious influence those decisions in ways that we are not quite aware of.
and if you look at a guy called dennis, when he decides what to become -- is it a lawyer, or does he want to become a doctor or a teacher?
so i am looking still for a stephanie.
if i make this whole thing a little bit more personal and see what makes me happy as a designer, the easiest answer, of course, is do more of the stuff that i like to do and much less of the stuff that i don't like to do -- for which it would be helpful to know what it is that i actually do like to do.
one of them is to think without pressure.
and i think that his widow is going to be very successful on her quest.
and from that point of view we turned it into a lovely project.
and i use a heat mat to sit the bath on and a thermostat to regulate it.
so this is telling us that the fermentation is in full swing.
so the bath on the left is after five days, and on the right, after 10.
so i spread it out onto a wooden sheet.
again, you can do that outside and just let it dry in the air.
what i'm looking for is a way to give the material the qualities that i need.
so what i want to do is say to a future bug, "spin me a thread.
so we only grow what we need.
they choose to leave their homes in order to earn money, to learn new skills, and to see the world.
they asked me, what did you do that you have changed so much?
i told them that i studied and worked hard.
just to make money is not enough meaning in life."
certain subjects came up over and over: how much money they made, what kind of husband they hoped to marry, whether they should jump to another factory or stay where they were.
only much later did i realize that she had been saying "qc," or quality control.
just because a person spends her time making a piece of something does not mean that she becomes that, a piece of something.
many articles calculate: how long would it take for this worker to work in order to earn enough money to buy what he's making?
how long should i stay in this factory?
how much money can i save?
how much will it take to buy an apartment or a car, to get married, or to put my child through school?
about a year after i met lu qingmin, or min, she invited me home to her family village for the chinese new year.
slowly it was dawning on me that these handbags were made by their factory, and every single one of them was authentic.
the first time i met min, she had just turned 18 and quit her first job on the assembly line of an electronics factory.
in a recent email to me, she explained, "a person should have some ambition while she is young so that in old age she can look back on her life and feel that it was not lived to no purpose."
very few of them would want to go back to the way things used to be.
when i first went to dongguan, i worried that it would be depressing to spend so much time with workers.
i also worried that nothing would ever happen to them, or that they would have nothing to say to me.
this is the coach purse that min gave me on the train home to visit her family.
i keep it with me to remind me of the ties that tie me to the young women i wrote about, ties that are not economic but personal in nature, measured not in money but in memories.
this purse is also a reminder that the things that you imagine, sitting in your office or in the library, are not how you find them when you actually go out into the world.
so we are very encouraged by these results.
they target poor families and convince the parents to send their children.
he joined the taliban a year ago when he was 13.
how do the taliban in your area get people to join them?
then they take us to a madrassa and teach us things from the koran.
they ask us to use them only against the infidels.
so they beat these children -- i have seen it; they feed them twice a day dried bread and water; they rarely allow them to play games; they tell them that, for eight hours at a time, all they have to do is read the koran.
and the basic message is that the western powers do not care about civilian deaths, so those people who live in areas and support governments that work with western powers are fair game.
but only if i get permission from my dad.
i have laid down my life fighting the infidels."
then god will look at my intention.
they have been around for almost 30 years now, which is quite amazing to think of, but they're only just starting to filter into the public arena.
so all these products that you can see on the screen were made in the same way.
and you can actually walk into it.
and on the other end of the spectrum, this is a microstructure.
and we're starting to see it being used for final end products.
which means that we can now present to the public the next generation of customization.
now this is not something that's ready for the public, but it is in working progress.
and i had an experience that really deepened and elucidated for me the understanding that i have.
it was in kenya, and i want to share it with you.
and when we were walking through the narrow alleys, it was literally impossible not to step in the raw sewage and the garbage alongside the little homes.
but at the same time it was also impossible not to see the human vitality, the aspiration and the ambition of the people who live there: women washing their babies, washing their clothes, hanging them out to dry.
and she keeps them all in school by selling water from that kiosk, and from selling soap and bread from the little store inside.
and it was here that i met jane.
i was struck immediately by the kindness and the gentleness in her face, and i asked her to tell me her story.
she started off by telling me her dream.
my first dream was to be a doctor, and the second was to marry a good man who would stay with me and my family, because my mother was a single mom, and couldn't afford to pay for school fees.
she got married when she was 18, had a baby right away.
and when she turned 20, found herself pregnant with a second child, her mom died and her husband left her -- married another woman.
it wasn't organized in the way we often think of it.
she would go into the city at night with about 20 girls, look for work, and sometimes come back with a few shillings, or sometimes with nothing.
and so she spent a year to save 50 dollars, and started borrowing, and over time she was able to buy a sewing machine.
some of them might be ones you gave.
and she does really good business.
and before you knew it, there was a crowd of women around her, buying these dresses.
do you think i'll miss not knowing if my children are going to come home at the end of the day?"
she said "if you gave me 10 minutes my bags would be packed."
but if i think about it, i thought i wanted a husband, but what i really wanted was a family that was loving.
and so i feel so blessed with everything that i have, that two days a week i go and i counsel hiv patients.
and if you are still alive you have to serve.'"
but maybe me, i give out something better because i give them hope."
think about something you've always wanted to add to your life and try it for the next 30 days.
it turns out, 30 days is just about the right amount of time to add a new habit or subtract a habit -- like watching the news -- from your life.
this was part of a challenge i did to take a picture every day for a month.
and i remember exactly where i was and what i was doing that day.
i also figured out that if you really want something badly enough, you can do anything for 30 days.
have you ever wanted to write a novel?
it turns out, all you have to do is write 1,667 words a day for a month.
by the way, the secret is not to go to sleep until you've written your words for the day.
i wrote it in a month.
i guarantee you the next 30 days are going to pass whether you like it or not, so why not think about something you have always wanted to try and give it a shot for the next 30 days.
right when i was 15 was when i first got interested in solar energy.
and i really felt that there would be potential to build some kind of thing that could concentrate light.
and i earned enough money to pay for my first year of caltech.
it was a really big excitement for me to get into caltech.
the whole first year was pass/fail, but the second year was graded.
and i was trying to figure if there was some way we could build something that would capitalize on that and try and get people back-up energy, in case the crisis really came.
and it really needed to get much lower than that to be cost effective.
this seemed practical now, because a lot of new technologies had come in the 25 years since i had last looked at it.
they have to track the sun, because they have to be pointing directly at the sun.
so we tried to come up with a way of making a non-tracking collector, a collector that would gather much more than one degree of light, with no moving parts.
so, about two and a half hours of the day we could collect with a stationary component.
so we took a look at another idea.
so what you see here is 12 separate petals, that each could be controlled with individual microprocessors that would only cost a dollar.
we can control all 12 of these petals for under 50 dollars and what this would allow us to do is not have to move the focus any more, but only move the petals.
the whole system would have a much lower profile, but also we could gather sunlight for six and a half to seven hours a day.
so we tried to look at all the different heat engines that have been used in history to try and convert sunlight to electricity, or heat to electricity.
so we looked at this engine, and this had some potential.
you could now get a lot more power in a lot smaller space, and that allowed the engine to be used for mobile applications.
i want to give you a brief explanation of how we looked at it and how it works.
you move that up and down with a little bit of energy but now you're only shifting the air down to the hot end and up to the cold end, down to the hot end and up to the cold end.
what about if i put a thermal sponge in the middle, in the passageway between where the air has to move between hot and cold?
so when the air pushes up to go from the hot end to the cold end, it puts some heat into the sponge.
so we really set out on a path to try and make the lowest cost possible.
let me show you what it looks like in real life.
so now you put the two things together.
this is being run out in the sun, and now i want to show you what the actual thing looks like.
the way the unit works is, when the sun comes out the engine will start and you get power out here.
and you also get hot water.
but you can use it to optionally heat hot water and that brings the efficiency up even higher because some of the heat that you would normally be rejecting, you can now use as useful energy, whether it's for a pool or hot water.
so this is the first test where we took it outside and each of the petals were individually seeking.
we're very excited about the progress, we do have a very long way to go though still, and let me tell you a little bit more about that.
it turns out there's a lot of powerful sun all around the world, obviously, but in special places where it happens to be relatively inexpensive to place these and also in many more places where there is high wind power.
it's just how many watts do you get per dollar, and how could you benefit from that using that power to change your life in some way.
if you get it down below five years then it becomes almost a no-brainer because the interest to own it -- someone else will finance it for you and you can just make money, basically from day one.
not to mention the 200 horses that are probably running right now to keep the airconditioning going.
what i am always thinking about is what this session is about, which is called simplicity.
and almost, i would almost call it being simple-minded, but in the best sense of the word.
but i gave him the money, because i was from riverdale so i had more money than he did.
and i decided that i wanted to tell -- but i still wanted to tell a narrative story and i still wanted to tell my stories.
so i decided that i would start to draw.
but the point was that i was there as myself, as a dreamer.
and what you have to do is, you really have to edit down to what you want to say.
i try to use the same kind of imagination, the same kind of whimsy, the same kind of love of language.
so, i get to put in all of the things that i love.
and i had this dream that i was wearing this fantastic green gown, and i was looking out the window, and it was really a beautiful thing.
the letter c had other things in it.
but i picked it up and i started reading it and i thought, this book is amazing.
so i decided it needed a few -- it needed a lift, it needed a few illustrations.
be wild of tongue in a way we can understand."
"how can i tell you everything that is in my heart?
i happen to know it for a fact.
which i think i made up, which is a good thing.
and then i want to tell you that this is a map.
i received a box in the mail and it was wrapped with newspaper and there was the picture of the man on the newspaper and he was dead.
it happens quite often in february."
and i really spend a lot of time wondering, how much truth do we tell?
how do we know when we are ourselves?
i taped my -- my aunt used to swim in the ocean every day of the year until she was about 85.
so, i was the one who should have kept the book, but it was a really wonderful moment.
and i would like to run it for them.
and then i go and have some tea.
and i look at a beautiful bowl of fruit, and i look at a dress that i sewed for friends of mine.
headlines that look like this when they have to do with climate change, and headlines that look like this when they have to do with air quality or smog.
they are both two branches of the same field of atmospheric science.
but despite its very small weight, enough of it is emitted into the atmosphere every year to equal the weight of all the people on the planet.
we blow it up and look at the pieces.
we also fly all over the world looking for this thing.
this is the tower in the middle of the rainforest, from above.
and this is the tower from below.
we have to fly at a special incline in order to make the measurements.
and as you come around the banks in these valleys, the forces can get up to two gs.
we do all of this to understand the chemistry of one molecule.
so what can we do about that?
so i want to give a little bit of a different perspective of how we can perhaps look at these things in a little bit of a different way.
you look at that -- what was true then is certainly true today.
we can still make the pieces.
we can make the right pieces.
so let's try to look at it from a different perspective.
put them all together, and put all this under kind of natural selection, under mutation, and rewarded things for how well they can move forward.
so if you look, you can see a lot of different machines come out of this.
so that was all done in simulation, but we can also do that on a real machine.
they all get a ride on the machine, and they get rewarded for how fast or how far they can make the machine move forward.
and you can see these robots are not ready to take over the world yet, but they gradually learn how to move forward, and they do this autonomously.
it has eight motors, four on the knees and four on the hip.
and once it has a self-model, it can use that to derive a pattern of locomotion.
but when you look at that, you have to remember that this machine did not do any physical trials on how to move forward, nor did it have a model of itself.
but after a very short while, you can see these blue things on the right there begin to take over.
tyler dewar: the way i feel right now is that all of the other speakers have said exactly what i wanted to say.
and it seems that the only thing left for me to say is to thank you all for your kindness.
td: but maybe in the spirit of appreciating the kindness of you all, i could share with you a little story about myself.
all of the plans for me were already made.
i was given the clothes that i needed to wear and told where i needed to be, given these very precious and holy looking robes to wear, with the understanding that it was something sacred or important.
and when i was seven years old, all of a sudden, a search party arrived at my home.
they were looking the next karmapa, and i noticed they were talking to my mom and dad, and the news came to me that they were telling me that i was the karmapa.
i thought that things would be pretty fun and there would be more things to play with.
it more felt to be the case to me that i was being treated like a statue, and i was to sit in one place like a statue would.
i talk to my mother once in a blue moon on the telephone.
and i think that's symbolic of what we're seeing in the world in general, that the world is becoming smaller and smaller, and that all of the peoples in the world are enjoying more opportunities for connection.
so we spoke and we heard some about design this week.
i think that it's important for us to remember that we need to keep pushing forward on the endeavor of the design of the heart.
i feel that there are some things that are getting in the way.
maybe we could look at that to be more similar to the falling of the berlin wall, where a divide that had kept two types of people apart had collapsed and opened up a door for further communication.
we have that information, but what often happens to us is that we don't really choose to pay attention to it.
we don't really choose to allow that to cause there to be a shift in our hearts.
so i think the way forward for the world -- one that will bring the path of outer development in harmony with the real root of happiness -- is that we allow the information that we have to really make a change in our heart.
and i think that sometimes we develop grand concepts of what happiness might look like for us, but that, if we pay attention, we can see that there are little symbols of happiness in every breath that we take.
td: so, every one of you who has come here is so talented, and you have so much to offer to the world, i think it would be a good note to conclude on then to just take a moment to appreciate how fortunate we are to have come together in this way and exchanged ideas and really form a strong aspiration and energy within ourselves that we will take the good that has come from this conference, the momentum, the positivity, and we will spread that and plant it in all of the corners of the world.
so the first question is, why do we need to even worry about a pandemic threat?
at the end of last christmas only 13 countries had seen h5n1.
and we have spent a lot of money.
so what have people been doing with this money?
most of these people don't actually know what their job will be.
it will be a different virus.
should we close all the schools?
well then what about all the workers?
or can we get away with some different kinds of masks?
and their hand got contaminated with the outside of the mask, and then they rubbed their nose.
there is some indication that it may buy you some time in the midst of an outbreak.
and then you're on your own because the pandemic is going to last for 18 to 24 months.
they are already out of date.
but by the time the second wave hit it took such a toll among the healthcare workers that we lost most of our doctors and nurses that were on the front lines.
and i think even those in the leadership would say that is the case, that we still have a long ways to go.
so what does that mean for you?
well if you think it's going to last 18 months, are you going to buy 18 months worth of masks for every single person in your family?
so then how can you tell who in your family has the flu if everybody is taking tamiflu?
do you really have a place to stockpile 18 months worth of food?
but i guess the other thing to add is, if you do have employees, and you do have a company, i think you have certain responsibilities to demonstrate that you are thinking ahead for them, and you are trying to plan.
you know way more than any of us.
to say ahh, if this happens then we are going to have a pandemic?
but we do not completely understand why.
and i don't know that there is any way responsibly for someone to start medicating their children with their personal supply of lipitor or something of that nature.
so i have for a long time said that what we really needed was a rapid diagnostic.
you could do it to your own kid.
it tells you if you have h5n1.
that may be because those events were occurring on the other side of the world where nobody was paying attention.
but it turns out that in 1918 that was not the case at all.
and i would just add we saw the same thing with sars.
and i think my time is up.
i thank you all for your attention.
now imagine you can pick it up and carry it with you.
but the best part about these components is that we bought them at a toy store.
so today we're going to show you one example of how you can use this.
pay attention to not only how fun this thing is, but also how the portability that comes with this can totally change the way you interact with a city like san francisco.
i mean, this is something you can pick up and carry with you anywhere you go.
so instead of looking at large amounts of energy needed for each person in this room to get around in a city, now you can look at much smaller amounts and more sustainable transportation.
there was this wondrous ending when people and fire fell asleep almost in unison.
now my story has a lot to do with dreaming, although i'm known to make my dreams come true.
no, the best way for me to start is to pay my respects to the gods of creativity.
when i was six years old, i fell in love with magic.
somehow i was more interested in pure manipulation than in all the silly little tricks in the box.
so i looked in the book for the most difficult move, and it was this.
now i'm not supposed to share that with you, but i have to show you the card is hidden in the back of the hand.
and let me show you something else.
and i go to see a famous magician and proudly ask him, "well what do you think?"
for the move to be professional, it has to be less than one second and it has to be perfect."
the clubs were escaping me at each throw.
and i was trying constantly to bring them back to me.
so i proudly showed him my clubs.
they are completely out of alignment.
and i put the rope around and around and around and around and around till i had no more rope.
so i cut one rope off.
and the next day one rope off.
so that is how -- in case there are people here in the audience who would like to try -- this is how not to learn wire walking.
in the meantime, i am being thrown out of five different schools because instead of listening to the teachers, i am my own teacher, progressing in my new art and becoming a street juggler.
i was starting to invent my own moves and bring them to perfection.
and i developed a certitude, a faith that convinced me that i will get safely to the other side.
i put my left foot on the cable, the weight of my body raised on my right leg anchored to the flank of the building.
my right leg will be unburdened, my right foot will freely meet the wire.
i was not interested in collecting the gigantic, in breaking records.
and since what's impossible is always unknown, it allows me to believe i can cheat the impossible.
now i have done the impossible not once, but many times.
some years ago i was invited to open the israel festival by a high-wire walk.
and i thought it would be incredible if in the middle of the wire i stopped and, like a magician, i produce a dove and send her in the sky as a living symbol of peace.
well now i must say, it was a little bit hard to find a dove in israel, but i got one.
now comes the day of the walk.
because all those people were made up of people who, for the most part, considered each other enemies.
and then in the most magnificent gesture, i send the bird of peace into the azure.
so i grab the dove, and for the second time i send her in the air.
they must think this guy with this dove, he must have spent years working with him.
i want you just for a second to experience this amazing human symphony.
and he tells me, he has on his desk a picture of me in the middle of the wire with a dove on my head.
please take this music with you home, and start gluing feathers to your arms and take off and fly, and look at the world from a different perspective.
so what you'll see up there is that it's really like the atmosphere of an open field, and there are tremendous numbers of plants and animals that have adapted to make their way and their life in the canopy.
so we may be the only family that has an ant named after each one of us.
we had predicted that they would grow back very quickly and that they would come in encroaching from the side.
and i use this little image to say this is what happens to mosses.
up in the canopy, if you were sitting next to me and you turned around from those primary forest ecosystems, you would also see scenes like this.
i've also looked out on urban places like this and thought about people who are disassociated from trees in their lives.
people who grew up in a place like this did not have the opportunity to climb trees and form a relationship with trees and forests, as i did when i was a young girl.
and then the students would come into our sound studios, they would make their own rap songs with their own beats.
well, my thought was that i could learn how to grow mosses, and that way we wouldn't have to take them out of the wild.
or perhaps al gore and naturally 7 could make a song about climate change that would really make you clap your hands.
when i look into my heart, i see trees -- this is actually an image of a real heart -- there are trees in our hearts, there are trees in your hearts.
when we come to understand nature, we are touching the most deep, the most important parts of our self.
if any of the more rowdier children questioned the authority of the parents, they were scolded.
the children looked and were amazed.
and so she set about to make it so.
i thought this was a basic question to ask in a democracy.
they want a say in decisions that are made in their name and with their money.
no, it's about trying to find the truth based on what you can see and what can be tested.
that, in the first enlightenment, led to questions about the right of kings, the divine right of kings to rule over people, or that women should be subordinate to men, or that the church was the official word of god.
and think about it -- if we want to make an important decision about buying a house, we don't just go off.
i mean, i don't know about you, but i want to see a lot of houses before i put that much money into it.
we're starting to find out more and more about these systems.
so if any of you out there like the sound of that and have a law like that in your country, i know that seb would love to hear from you about collaborating and getting that into your country.
so i can tell you firsthand what it was like to have access to this leak.
do you know the one i mean?
it was just like that, because what you started to see is that all of these grand statesmen, these very pompous politicians, they were just like us.
okay, but i thought it was a very important point for all of us to grasp, these are human beings just like us.
he threw it all out there.
i want to see why do you -- you just say so?
and humility because we are all human.
we have an official secrets act with no public interest test.
now wouldn't it be amazing, and really, this is what i want all of you to think about, if we had an official disclosure act where officials were punished if they were found to have suppressed or hidden information that was in the public interest?
i mean, there definitely is progress on the line, but i think what we find is that the closer that we get right into the heart of power, the more opaque, closed it becomes.
so it was only just the other week that i heard london's metropolitan police commissioner talking about why the police need access to all of our communications, spying on us without any judicial oversight, and he said it was a matter of life and death.
he actually said that, it was a matter of life and death.
equally, it could be better than we've been led to believe, but either way, we have to start seeing it exactly as it is, with all of its problems, because it's only by seeing it with all of its problems that we'll be able to fix them and live in a world in which we can all be happily ever after.
it was taken 18 years ago.
i was 19 years old at the time.
it turns out that that particular one was the first live one of that ever taken alive.
and so, it was really exciting to me to have this moment in time, it really set the course for the rest of my life.
but really the most significant thing, the most profound thing about this picture is that it was taken two days before i was completely paralyzed from the neck down.
i learned two really important things that day.
and the second thing i learned was that i knew, with profound certainty, that this is exactly what i was going to do for the rest of my life.
we know almost nothing about it.
the problem happens when you start to go underwater.
and of course, the third problem is the one i found out the hard way in palau, which is the bends.
the tricky part is the implementation.
and it was fine and dandy, and it allowed us to go down and find new species.
there had to be a better way.
how is it that they do that?
you need three of them, so that if one of them goes bad, you know which one it is.
this is the high-tech gadgetry that allows us to do what we do on these kinds of deep dives.
and i can talk about it all day -- just ask my wife -- but i want to move on to something that's kind of much more interesting.
we start up here on the boat, and for all this high-tech, expensive equipment, this is still the best way to get in the water -- just pfft!
and those fishes that you see right now are new species.
but this is what it looks like, and this kind of habitat just goes on and on and on for miles.
i think we have their attention.
more people are killed by pigs, more people are killed by lightning strikes, more people are killed at soccer games in england.
this one we actually first discovered back in the air days -- the bad old air days, as we used to say -- when we were doing these kind of dives with air.
sure enough, i had caught one -- i just completely forgot that i had caught one.
and this is another neat one.
when we first found it, we weren't even sure what family this thing belonged to, so we just called it the dr.
there are only five to six thousand known species.
at the beginning i told you that i was going to show you two extraordinary photographs.
this one was taken at the exact moment i was down there filming those sharks.
the reason i show this -- not to put a downer on everything -- but i just want to use it to key off my philosophy of life in general, which is that we all have two goals.
the first goal we share with every other living thing on this planet, which is to survive.
i thought that was an old one.
and as a special treat, he took me to the pathology lab and took a real human brain out of the jar and placed it in my hands.
and it was while i was doing my ph.d.
which means that each and every one of you here today knows at least one child that is suffering from a developmental disorder.
and the doctors told his parents he was never going to be able to communicate or interact socially, and he would probably never have too much language.
these are the faces of the children that i have tested with stories just like justin.
one more mind will be unlocked.
and one more child who has been misdiagnosed or even undiagnosed by the system will finally realize his or her true potential while there's still time for his or her brain to recover.
16 times farther away than the moon, or four percent of the distance to the sun.
these extremophiles tell us that life may exist in many other environments.
it takes a full eight minutes for its radiation to reach us.
the first is that problems are inevitable.
the second is that problems are soluble.
and that's the length of time that the earth was lifeless.
and the other thing that one should take away from this chart is the very narrow range of time over which humans can claim to be the dominant intelligence on the planet.
we are a small part of the story of cosmic evolution, and we are going to be responsible for our continued participation in that story, and perhaps seti will help as well.
and no one would decide that the ocean was without fish on the basis of one glass of water.
this is a very good year.
that brings me to my wish.
there are two clips i want to show you, the first one is a kind of hodgepodge, its just three little moments, four little moments with three of the people who are here tonight.
they play off each other in a wonderful way.
i think he felt that the greatest things in life were accidental, and perhaps not planned at all.
it is the capital of the country, and it took 23 years to build, which is something they seem to be very proud of over there.
the building was finished in 1983.
so it continued on for many years after he died.
think about that when you see that building, that sometimes the things we strive for so hard in life we never get to see finished.
and you know, when i knew him when i was in the office, he would come in from a trip, and he would be in the office for two or three days intensely, and he would pack up and go.
you know he'd be in the office till three in the morning working with us and there was this kind of sense of the nomad in him.
he wanted to be a moses here, he gave us democracy.
in that way it is so relevant.
he didn't care for how much money this country has, or whether he would be able to ever finish this building, but somehow he has been able to do it, build it, here.
he paid his life for this, and that is why he is great and we'll remember him.
but i think his son will understand this, and will have no sense of grudge, or sense of being neglected, i think.
he cared in a very different manner, but it takes a lot of time to understand that.
he could not say no to anything, and that is why, that he cannot say no to things, we got this building today.
you see, only that way you can be able to understand him.
there is no other shortcut, no other way to really understand him.
but i think he has given us this building and we feel all the time for him, that's why, he has given love for us.
he could not probably give the right kind of love for you, but for us, he has given the people the right kind of love, that is important.
so government needs to make us do something painful to fix it.
but the new story about oil is the government doesn't have to force us to do painful things to get off oil -- not just incrementally, but completely -- quite the contrary.
now, there are two big reasons to be concerned about oil.
that seems to make more sense.
it could well be enough to double the oil price, for example.
and one of the worst of these is what it does to our standing in the world if other countries think that everything we do is about oil, if we have to treat countries that have oil differently than countries that don't have oil.
and our military get quite unhappy with having to stand guard on pipelines in far-off-istan when what they actually signed up for was to protect american citizens.
we can save half the oil by using it more efficiently, at a cost of 12 dollars per saved barrel.
they make a little net money for the treasury.
and it turns out that these are quite remarkable for safety.
and when you make them light in the right way, that can be simpler and cheaper to make.
and the process needed to make it is actually coming toward the market quite nicely.
each of the parts can be easily lifted with no hoist.
so you got rid of the body shop.
or wait to capture the second half of it.
so we have lots of options.
just turn it over to the private sector, and we have an internet.
and the one thing i'd like to point out here is that we've done this before.
they would have been gone if we'd kept that up one more year.
and yet what we proved then is the u.s.
has more market power than opec.
ours is on the demand side.
we can use less oil faster than they can conveniently sell less oil.
supply base on the coast of antarctica.
they have to dig themselves out every day.
and this is the object of their scrutiny.
why do we need to study this anymore?
they work against the clock and against the thermometer.
early explorers sailed off the edge of the map, and they found a place where the normal rules of time and temperature seem suspended.
it is a voice of experience.
it is a voice we should heed.
i met with david to talk about what i might do in his company.
they would go for it if they could figure out how.
they taught me how to look and see, and they did not do the incredibly stupid thing of saying to a child, "of all these things we already make you, which do you like best?"
and these voices will be accompanied by photographs that they took for us of their lives, of the things that they value and care about.
girl 10: well, sometimes it gets annoying when your brothers and sisters, or brother or sister, when they copy you and you get your idea first and they take your idea and they do it themselves.
but she gives my sister everything.
she asked me to make sure you knew about it.
i could get invited to that party any day if i wanted to.
if at any time during the game we want to learn more about the characters, we can go into this hidden hallway, and i'll quickly just show you the interface.
i'm going to talk today about the pleasures of everyday life.
but i want to begin with a story of an unusual and terrible man.
and what he really wanted was something by vermeer.
then the allied forces went through his collections and found the paintings and went after the people who sold it to him.
but you could feel sympathy for the reaction he had when he was told that his favorite painting was actually a forgery.
and he killed himself soon afterwards.
and when that was discovered, it lost all its value and was taken away from the museum.
why do we respond so much to our knowledge of where something comes from?
how do you make children not just be more likely to eat carrots and drink milk, but to get more pleasure from eating carrots and drinking milk -- to think they taste better?
how do you get adults to really enjoy wine?
you probably think the picture on the left is male, the one on the right is female.
it will make a difference if they turn out to be much younger or much older than you think they are.
this is why spouses in happy marriages tend to think that their husband or wife looks much better than anyone else thinks that they do.
so one reason why you might like something is its utility.
but each of these three objects has value above and beyond what it can do for you based on its history.
you could get something that looked like it or felt like it, but you couldn't get the same object back.
so in one of our experiments, we asked people to name a famous person who they adored, a living person they adored.
i love the work of chagall.
if people want to get me something at the end of the conference, you could buy me a chagall.
and that could explain the difference between an original and a forgery.
this is marla olmstead who did most of her work when she was three years old.
but what i want to point out is you can buy this from itunes.
the second shock hurts just as much, and the third and the fourth and the fifth.
it hurts more if you believe somebody is doing it to you on purpose.
epidemiology is the science of how we know in the real world if something is good for you or bad for you.
and these are just some of the examples.
these are from the daily mail.
so already you can see there are contradictions.
in science, we want to know what your reasons are for believing something.
how do you know that something is good for us or bad for us?
you get a certificate and everything.
now that's not the only reason that we think this person is an idiot.
so you go and find this paper, and what you find is it is a real piece of science.
and they very helpfully tell you how to go and find the paper.
you have to take a snapshot of how people are now.
news media over the past decade.
and this is the trial of fish oil pills.
so this is what they were going to do in their trial.
so we know that our beliefs and expectations can be manipulated, which is why we do trials where we control against a placebo -- where one half of the people get the real treatment and the other half get placebo.
and you can get license to bring your drug to market with only data showing that it's better than nothing, which is useless for a doctor like me trying to make a decision.
how can we explain this strange phenomenon?
and this is the most important aspect of the whole story.
we need to have all of the data on a particular treatment to know whether or not it really is effective.
so this is a graph of all of the trials that have been done on a particular treatment.
so you can see here that the small negative trials that should be on the bottom left have disappeared.
i hope i try to go out of my way to try and read and understand all the literature.
now if you think about it, if i tossed a coin a hundred times, and i'm allowed to withhold from you the answers half the times, then i can convince you that i have a coin with two heads.
and they need to have access to all of the trial data.
we cannot make decisions in the absence of all of the information.
all of these things are happening in plain sight, and they're all protected by a force field of tediousness.
and i think, with all of the problems in science, one of the best things that we can do is to lift up the lid, finger around in the mechanics and peer in.
and each one of these forces split the world, tore the world apart, divided the world.
it was only in the second half of the 20th century that we slowly began to pull ourselves out of this abyss.
here is just a little bit of data.
never before in human history have so many people been raised out of such great poverty as happened in china.
and over the next 18 years have almost tripled.
on the cutting edge today it's new ideas which are driving growth.
more than ever before it is these types of ideas which are driving growth on the cutting edge.
now ideas have this amazing property.
and to explain why this is so, i have a question.
because there are more drugs to treat common diseases than there are to treat rare diseases.
the reason for this is incentives.
a large fraction of those people are in the united states.
and for that i am very grateful.
but consider the following: if the world as a whole were as wealthy as the united states is now there would be more than five times as many scientists and engineers contributing to ideas which benefit everyone, which are shared by everyone.
but it is going to happen in this century.
this means we all benefit when another country gets rich.
we should not fear other countries becoming wealthy.
we need a greater demand for ideas -- those larger markets i was talking about earlier -- and a greater supply of ideas for the world.
now you can see some of the reasons why i'm optimistic.
in fact if you look at world history you can see some reasons for optimism.
so growth can wash away even what appears to be a great depression.
when i was writing up my notes oil was $140 per barrel.
so people were asking a question.
and there is some truth to this, in the sense that we have something of a finite resource, and increased growth is going to push up demand for that.
you can see this in the data.
now the united states has a particularly important role to play in this: to keep our education system globalized, to keep our education system open to students from all over the world, because our education system is the candle that other students come to light their own candles.
so i imagine my life: if a hundred years ago china had been the most powerful nation in the world and they came to the united states in search of coal, and they found it, and, in fact, they found lots of it right here.
i saw people struggling to get by, not knowing what was what and what was next.
and then i asked myself the question.
and i realized, because the chinese ingratiated themselves with a small ruling class here in the united states who stole all of that money and all of that wealth for themselves.
and they did things like train americans to help protect the coal.
can you imagine what you would feel if you were in my shoes?
can you imagine walking out of this building and seeing a tank sitting out there or a truck full of soldiers?
and just imagine what you would feel.
and you just feel the anger and you feel the fear.
and so to help you, perhaps you're a member of this middle class family in baghdad -- and what you want is the best for your kids.
so you have a sense of what the americans are thinking.
you want a better life for yourself.
let me help you with some things that you might be thinking.
and you know why they have a design?
you know why they have their eyes set on it?
and what else do you think about these people?
you see people struggling to get by.
and you feel something about this.
and you talk about it with your friends.
once a life of happiness and joy and suddenly, pain and sorrow.
not a single person in your country has not been touched.
and you feel something about that -- of course you do.
he was one of the leading commanders in the second invasion of iraq.
how would they do this to their little kids?"
we don't see it that way in the united states, but you see it that way.
step outside of your shoes that you're in right now and step back into your normal shoes.
so i want you to go there.
what do you think about that scene?
what are you feeling and thinking about this photo, about this woman?
can you imagine that maybe one of them in the morning bent down to their child and hugged their child and said, "dear, i'll be back later.
why would you use this example of all examples?"
you can walk a mile when it comes to understanding why that person's driving 40 miles per hour in the passing lane, or your teenage son, or your neighbor who annoys you by cutting his lawn on sunday mornings.
and then do it again and do it again and do it again.
everything in your life has changed.
wilson on saving life on earth
yet life in the sea may depend on these tiny creatures.
these examples are just the first glimpse of our ignorance of life on this planet.
at this point i think we have a little impressionistic film that was made especially for this occasion.
and that may be just the beginning!
and so it is everywhere one looks.
what will we and all future generations lose if much of the living environment is thus degraded?
so this brings me to my wish for tedsters, and to anyone else around the world who hears this talk.
a concept that has already taken hold and is beginning to spread and be looked at seriously?
i wish you would help them.
so throughout my childhood, my mother was incarcerated and i didn't have my father because i didn't even learn his first name until i was in the sixth grade.
so two people who grew up in the great depression, there in the very, very early '80s took on a new kid.
and i would like to say that life was totally easy with them.
but they loved the hell out of me.
he ran and worked in a factory.
so my best friends in life were the characters i read about in books.
and i just, i can just remember the love that she offered us as her students.
a published author of books came to talk to us about what he did for a living.
my book had a title page.
i was clearly worried about my intellectual property when i was eight.
and it was a story that was told with words and pictures, exactly what i do now for a living, and i sometimes let the words have the stage on their own, and sometimes i allowed the pictures to work on their own to tell the story.
so i learned to write about myself in third person at a young age.
and i liked making that book because i loved using my imagination, and that's what writing is.
i went from having art once a week to twice a month to once a month to not at all.
he wanted me to go to a private school, and he gave me an option.
so how did i make friends?
and so i took this picture, and i handed it to him.
just stop drawing in my class."
so my parents never found out about it.
and i loved that thought, of being able to share my ideas through the printed page.
i had this book that was how to draw comics in the marvel way, and it taught me how to draw superheroes, how to draw a woman, how to draw muscles just the way they were supposed to be if i were to ever draw for x-men or spiderman.
now when i was a teenager, i was angsty as any teenager was, but after 17 years of having a mother who was in and out of my life like a yo-yo and a father who was faceless, i was angry.
and when i was 17, i met my father for the first time, upon which i learned i had a brother and sister i had never known about.
and on the day i met my father for the first time, i was rejected from the rhode island school of design, my one and only choice for college.
and i started writing books for young readers when i was a senior in high school.
i transferred to risd as a sophomore, and it was there that i took every course that i could on writing, and it was there that i wrote a story about a giant orange slug who wanted to be friends with this kid.
the kid had no patience for him.
i set up a studio and i tried to get published.
i would send out my books.
do you have a job yet?"
and i sent out one last batch of postcards.
i liked your art, so i went to your website and i'm wondering if you ever tried writing any of your own stories, because i really like your art and it looks like there are some stories that go with them.
so the next week i "happened" to be in new york.
they sold out of all of their books.
and then something happened that changed my life.
you only get one birthday per year.
i have 10 picture books out.
and i got to see my name in lights because kids put my name in lights.
and it displayed the work from my first 10 years of publishing, and you know who was there to celebrate?
so the biggest moment for me, though, my most important job now is i am a dad myself, and i have two beautiful daughters, and my goal is to surround them by inspiration, by the books that are in every single room of our house to the murals i painted in their rooms to the moments for creativity where you find, in quiet times, by making faces on the patio to letting her sit in the very desk that i've sat in for the past 20 years.
i love the idea that you can transform, become somebody else and look at life with a completely new perspective.
i love the idea that people will sit in one room for a couple of hours and listen.
and our ability to imagine is what makes us explorers.
so i began drawing the story that was moving in my head.
go from one world to another in a second.
and i think the reason why is that i was able to use their language and their reality in order to transport them into another.
it's as much about bringing new disciplines inside this box as it is about taking theater out of its box.
he gave entertainment, pleasure and relief to so many human beings when they needed it the most.
and i'm going to say a few words about each one this morning.
this would be an example of how to do that.
to give something involves both causing something to go and causing someone to have.
you may just be loud or obnoxious, or some other way causing them to have the headache.
so, that's an example of the kind of thing that i do in my day job.
you can think of this as the language of thought, or "mentalese."
i think the key idea is that language is a way of negotiating relationships, and human relationships fall into a number of types.
or if a dinner guest after the meal pulled out his wallet and offered to pay you for the meal, that would be rather awkward as well.
one way of thinking about it is to imagine what it would be like if language -- where it could only be used literally.
if the officer is honest, you get a huge penalty of being arrested for bribery.
so you get the best of both worlds.
i would like to start my talk with actually two questions, and the first one is: how many people here actually eat pig meat?
and how many people have actually seen a live pig producing this meat?
they eat about one-third, and the rest is exported to all kinds of countries in europe and the rest of the world.
and what i was curious about -- because historically, the whole pig would be used up until the last bit so nothing would be wasted -- and i was curious to find out if this was actually still the case.
and i spent about three years researching.
and i followed this one pig with number "05049," all the way up until the end and to what products it's made of.
and what was striking to me is that the farmers actually had no clue what was made of their pigs, but the consumers -- as in us -- had also no idea of the pigs being in all these products.
and to show you how often you actually meet part of this pig in a regular day, i want to show you some images of the book.
and this is actually sold in the frozen area of the supermarket.
this actually also goes for wine as well as fruit juice.
and the reason for this is that pigs are actually quite close to human beings, so the collagen is as well.
and can you send me a bullet?"
and what happens is this can be implanted into a human heart without open heart surgery.
and one of these grebes came along while we were rowing.
life has a lot to teach us.
but what i'd like to talk about today is what life might teach us in technology and in design.
or -- and this is the fun part for me -- we want you to take us out into the natural world.
so we went for a walk on the beach and i said, well, give me one of your big problems.
five minutes later they were back in the boat.
they would snorkel for as long as we would let them snorkel.
what had happened was that they realized that there were organisms out there that had already solved the problems that they had spent their careers trying to solve.
what they realized was that the answers to their questions are everywhere; they just needed to change the lenses with which they saw the world.
more importantly, what should we ask in the next 10 years?
how does life make the most of things?
because life doesn't really deal in things; there are no things in the natural world divorced from their systems.
the two groups are not talking to each other.
on the lower left there is a picture of mother of pearl forming out of seawater.
imagine being able to make perfect lenses.
what if we were to say, no more hard rock mining?
this is a picture of the spinnerets coming out of a spider and the silk being formed from a spider.
there is a problem with vaccines around the world not getting to patients.
but what i am going to do is tell you that the most important thing, besides all of these adaptations, is the fact that these organisms have figured out a way to do the amazing things they do while taking care of the place that's going to take care of their offspring.
and that means finding a way to do what they do without destroying the place that'll take care of their offspring.
and it does that in the middle of having great foreplay and meeting their needs.
we have to find a way to meet our needs, while making of this place an eden.
but this is the face of resilience.
and that turned out to be women.
i had left abc news and a career i loved at the age of 30 for business school, a path i knew almost nothing about.
and i saw from a young age that having a decent job and earning a good living made the biggest difference for families who were struggling.
and she said business was even more important for women because earning an income earned respect and money was power for women.
i mean here was a girl who had never lived in peace time who somehow had come to sound like a candidate from "the apprentice."
my first business was a dressmaking business i started under the taliban.
and that was actually an excellent business, because we provided jobs for women all around our neighborhood.
by the time we met, she had 20 employees, most of them women, who were sending their boys and their girls to school.
and she was just the start.
and if you see the word "entrepreneur," most people think men.
because we aim low and we think small when it comes to women.
the great news is we already know what works.
we have so much room to grow.
it is about how we invest and it's about how we see women.
and women can no longer be both half the population and a special interest group.
and finally, there is no society anywhere in all the world that is not changed except by its most exceptional.
my mom was a single mom who worked at the phone company during the day and sold tupperware at night so that i could have every opportunity possible.
and when i was applying to business school and felt certain i couldn't do it and nobody i knew had done it, i went to my aunt who survived years of beatings at the hand of her husband and escaped a marriage of abuse with only her dignity intact.
the women in my family are not exceptions.
the women in this room and watching in l.a.
and all around the world are not exceptions.
we are not a special interest group.
when we change the way we see ourselves, others will follow.
and it is time for all of us to think bigger.
i would love to share with you a story.
now during this time, the book was the king of storytelling.
but it was a little bit boring.
they were happy because the story survived, and that the world would keep on spinning.
and things got a lot more fun when the internet came around.
for example, one company would tell a story of love through its very own search engine.
and this was a cause for celebration.
but can i use a paper towel?
but what about a recycled paper towel that comes in those little half sheets?
i wipe it up with a sponge, and i put it under the running water, and i have a lot less energy and a lot more water.
unless you're like me and you leave the handle in the position of hot even when you turn it on, and then you start to use more energy.
so what this says is that sometimes the things that you least expect -- the position in which you put the handle -- have a bigger effect than any of those other things that you were trying to optimize.
now imagine someone as twisted as me trying to build a house.
and there's a thousand and one articles out there telling us how to make all these green trade-offs.
we wanted to know how much better we could do.
we then go on to the first thing that was very surprising.
and so the question is: how could we make that back?
you might want to leave now.
how did you get started doing this?"
about 10 years ago, i was at a cocktail party with a friend of mine, and we're sitting there, and he was complaining about the crows that he had seen that were all over his yard and making a big mess.
i said that was stupid, you know, maybe we should just train them to do something useful.
and he said that was impossible.
but part of the reason that i found this interesting is that i started noticing that we are very aware of all the species that are going extinct on the planet as a result of human habitation expansion, and no one seems to be paying attention to all the species that are actually living -- that are surviving.
and as i started looking at them, i was finding that they had hyper-adapted.
and in return, we just tried to kill them all the time.
and these crows use sticks in the wild to get insects and whatnot out of pieces of wood.
she had never seen this done before.
no one taught her to bend this into a hook, had shown her how it could happen.
but she did it all on her own.
so we know that these crows are really smart, but the more i dug into this, the more i found that they actually have an even more significant adaptation.
the problem now is collecting the bits, without getting run over.
wait for the light to stop the traffic.
and since that time, all of the crows in the neighborhood are picking up this behavior.
parents seem to be teaching their young.
we found out they're really smart, and we found out that they can teach each other.
and when all this became clear to me, i realized the only obvious thing to do is build a vending machine.
then you can come back anytime and get yourself a peanut.
so, when they get really used to that, we move on to the crows coming back.
and we move to the third stage, where we only give them a coin.
and so this goes on for some time.
the crows learn that all they have to do is show up, wait for the coin to come out, put the coin in the slot, and then they get their peanut.
and when they're really good and comfortable with that, we move to the final stage, in which they show up and nothing happens.
and this is where we see the difference between crows and other animals.
they do this maybe half a dozen times before they get bored, and then they go off and play in traffic.
i think that crows can be trained to do other things.
for example, why not train them to pick up garbage after stadium events?
or maybe do search and rescue?
so i thought he would be the perfect person to go to to ask about a defining moment in american history.
it went down and i came up.
so i say to the baby, holding my hand over my mouth because my breath must be 100 proof, i say to the baby, 'sir or madam, what is your considered opinion of the human species?'
but there are certain other connotations to the word "risk," and the same thing about the word "nature."
everything i do is word for word off a tape.
i ran out of excuses about how we got black eyes and busted lips and bruises.
and i failed them dramatically, because i allowed it to go on and on and on.
he had a belt because he had this warped perverted thing that myesha was having sex with her little brother and they was fondling each other -- that would be his reason.
and so he put her in the bathtub, and i was in the bedroom with the baby.
and she would hit her head on the tub.
i just sat there and listened.
and then he put her in the hallway.
and so she set there for about four or five hours.
all around her head was just swollen; her head was about two sizes of its own size.
he let her go to sleep.
i knew immediately that she was dead.
i didn't even want to accept the fact that she was dead, so i went in and i put a mirror to her mouth -- there was no thing, nothing, coming out of her mouth.
and we told the security guard what we had put on her and we went home and we dressed her in exactly the same thing that we had told the security guard that we had put on her.
and he just laid her right on the shoulder of the highway.
and this next piece is from that.
because this is what i would say i've learned the most about race relations, from this piece.
and i mean, the people just danced in the streets because they were afraid there was going to be another riot.
young-soon han, i suppose will have taught me the most that i have learned about race.
why do we have to be left out?
we didn't get any because we have a car and a house.
i was sitting here watching them the morning after the verdict, and all the day they were having a party, they celebrated, all of south central, all the churches.
and i wonder if that is really justice for them, to get their rights in that way.
i was swallowing the bitterness, sitting here alone and watching them.
i wish that i could live together with black people.
and i told you that in -- you know, i didn't give you the year, but in '79 i thought that i was going to go around and find bull riders and pig farmers and people like that, and i got sidetracked on race relations.
it seems like he has so much bad luck, you know.
"and then you called me up and you said you wanted to come out here and interview me and she went and looked you up on the internet.
you're not even going to be able to answer her questions.'
it would have to be the rodeo.
and i had to go and ride in the rodeo that night, so i didn't want them to put me under anesthesia, or whatever you call it.
i can hear them sing the sounds of the car alarms like they were songs of spring.
i'll get that lady at the laundromat who always seems to know what being nice is.
where in the world is this world heading?
it is the voice of life that calls us to come and learn.
wait for the man with the mockingbird."
and so the bizarre result of this is that most of our popular culture is actually based on these presumptions about our demographics.
they can make some educated guesses.
that's easier for them to find out than who you are.
suddenly our taste is being respected in a way that it hasn't been before.
it turns out that women are really driving the social media revolution.
i think that media companies are going to hire a lot more women, because they realize this is important for their business, and i think that women are also going to continue to dominate the social media sphere.
so you may be asking, well why is it important that i know what entertains people?
this is a very important thing to know about people.
and so, if you have any interest in understanding the world, looking at how people amuse themselves is a really good way to start.
can you even imagine what that looks like?
bear in mind this was an ultrasound, so it would have been moving images.
i think the most curious one that i came across was a case report of a woman who had an orgasm every time she brushed her teeth.
and the amazing thing to me is that now you would think this woman would like have excellent oral hygiene.
she said that the last time she had done it was on the disneyland tram.
and this was one of those cases that went on and on.
he tried everything his friends suggested.
and they decided, being masters and johnson, that they would get to the bottom of it.
i have an answer for you.
and i got a copy of this dvd.
this is my unveiling, because i am going to show you a clip.
this did not stop masters and johnson.
and the woman would have sex with it.
that is what they would do.
this just kills me, not because i wanted to use it -- i wanted to see it.
even when our lives appear fine from the outside, locked within can be a world of quiet suffering, leading some to the decision to end their life.
the school where he graduated from with his master's had just offered him a teaching appointment, which meant not only a salary, but benefits for the first time in ages.
because once john committed himself to putting his life back together -- first physically, then emotionally, and then spiritually -- he found that there were very few resources available to someone who has attempted to end their life in the way that he did.
but after having lost a beloved teacher in 2006 and a good friend last year to suicide, and sitting last year at tedactive, i knew that i needed to step out of my silence and past my taboos to talk about an idea worth spreading -- and that is that people who have made the difficult choice to come back to life need more resources and need our help.
now i know that seems ludicrous.
and believe me, i lived the same sad life until about three years ago.
and what happened to me was i bought, what was for me, a very expensive pair of shoes.
now up until that moment, i would have thought that, by age 50, one of the life skills that i had really nailed was tying my shoes.
this is the way that most of us were taught to tie our shoes.
as it turns out, there's a strong form and a weak form of this knot, and we were taught to tie the weak form.
if you pull the strands at the base of the knot, you will see that the bow will orient itself down the long axis of the shoe.
if we start over and simply go the other direction around the bow, we get this, the strong form of the knot.
it will come untied less often.
this is just what it sounds like if we swiss try to speak american.
so the reading would be over very quickly.
i had to look at it every day and after a while i just couldn't stand the mess anymore this guy was looking at all day long.
so i decided to give him a little support, and brought some order into neatly stacking the blocks on top of each other.
and i think he looks now less miserable.
and i can show here a very good example.
we can see here he started out with orange, and then he already ran out of orange, and here we can see he decided to take a break for a square.
i would like to show you here a picture which is a bit more advanced.
if my room back home had looked like this, my mother would have grounded me for three days.
we are only happy when things are in order.
but to go on, here is a very good example to see.
and this is my -- -- you can see now the whole thing takes up far less space.
but i can see in your faces that you're still a little bit skeptical.
i'm not sure myself what it means but it sounds good anyway.
i would like to do a short test with you.
everyone is sitting in quite an orderly fashion here this morning.
so i would like to ask you all to raise your right hand.
the right hand is the one we write with, apart from the left-handers.
so we can also see that very clearly in this next painting.
one can see here quite clearly, you can see we have 25 pale green elements, of which one is in the form of a circle.
you can add them to all the squares of paul klee.
in the end, one has a list with which one then can arrange.
but i think it could still benefit from more discipline.
and i think the whole thing adds up much better if you do it like this.
it goes back to a time when i was very often staying in hotels.
so after a while i decided to have a little fun, and before leaving the room each day i'd scatter a few things around the space.
by the time i returned everything had always been neatly returned to its place.
and when i returned it looked like this.
yeah, at least it is now possible to do some vacuuming.
so we can make a short test with you.
so it's possible that some of you would make it like this.
i would actually prefer to do it more this way.
but it's a very good example to see that the whole work was more of a handicraft endeavor that involved the very time-consuming job of cutting out the various elements and sticking them back in new arrangements.
here is a very good example.
but after a while, i just decided here to go all the way and put the paint back into the cans.
but to round things up i would like to show you just one more.
and for those who want to see more, i've got my book downstairs in the bookshop.
and i'm happy to sign it for you with any name of any artist.
and i started to bring some order into some flags.
and then maybe before i leave you ...
i couldn't find a way to tidy that up properly, so i just decided to make it a little bit more simpler.
and it was kind of spooky, because he would say these things that just sounded like they really understood you.
i think we have a situation here.
how on earth are you going to spread a thousand ideas?
even if you just try to get all of those ideas into your head by watching all those thousand ted videos, it would actually currently take you over 250 hours to do so.
the damage to the economy for each one who does this is around $15,000.
so if a novel can be put into six words and a whole memoir can be put into six words, you don't need more than six words for a tedtalk.
we could have been done by lunch here.
so i thought this was quite worthwhile.
so here are some of the results that i received.
i guess many of you have seen one or more of his talks.
they used their six words to talk back to me and ask me if i'd been too much on google lately.
here are some of my favorites.
i wanted to go all the way, all the way down the distillery, starting out with a thousand tedtalks.
so i was almost ready to give up when one night i played around with these sentences and found out that there's actually a beautiful solution in here.
we had to give him a problem because when we first created milo, we realized that he came across as a little bit of a brat, to be honest with you.
he was quite a know-it-all, and he wanted to kind of make you laugh.
so here he is walking through the grass.
so remember, this is the first time you've met him, and we really want to draw you in and make you more curious.
we actually do something called body matching.
the other thing to use is your body.
now we need to have a bit more engagement, and again, what we can do is we can look at the body.
we're trying to introduce you to what i believe is the most wonderful part, you being able to talk in your natural voice to milo.
now is the time when we open that portal and allow you to talk to milo.
you know what parents are like.
you've got a cool garden to play in and a pond.
his mind is based in a cloud.
and this leads to the wonderful irony that our languages exist to prevent us from communicating.
now it's a little bit of a surprise that to get an answer to that question, we have to go to tool use in the chimpanzees.
now these chimpanzees are using tools, and we take that as a sign of their intelligence.
but if they really were intelligent, why would they use a stick to extract termites from the ground rather than a shovel?
and so they just do the same thing over and over and over again.
in fact, we could go away for a million years and come back and these chimpanzees would be doing the same thing with the same sticks for the termites and the same rocks to crack open the nuts.
but if we look at the fossil record, we see that they made the same hand axe over and over and over again for one million years.
we can build on their wisdom.
if i can learn by watching you, i can steal your best ideas, and i can benefit from your efforts, without having to put in the time and energy that you did into developing them.
if i can watch which lure you use to catch a fish, or i can watch how you flake your hand axe to make it better, or if i follow you secretly to your mushroom patch, i can benefit from your knowledge and wisdom and skills, and maybe even catch that fish before you do.
because then the benefits of our ideas and knowledge would flow just to our relatives.
so what you do is -- one of those people has not really acquired language yet.
and let's pretend the other one is good at language skills.
so what you do one day is you take a pile of arrowheads, and you walk up to the one that can't speak very well, and you put the arrowheads down in front of him, hoping that he'll get the idea that you want to trade your arrowheads for finished arrows.
and this is why our species has prospered around the world while the rest of the animals sit behind bars in zoos, languishing.
and so we prospered in a way that no other animal has.
language really is the voice of our genes.
there are places on that island where you can encounter a new language every two or three miles.
and we know this because when we study different language groups and associate them with their cultures, we see that different languages slow the flow of ideas between groups.
they slow the flow of technologies.
and they even slow the flow of genes.
our modern world is communicating with itself and with each other more than it has at any time in its past.
and that question is whether in this modern, globalized world we can really afford to have all these different languages.
do we have any idea how we could have defeated neanderthals if they also had language?
only when women in developing countries have equal access to education and economic opportunity will we be using all our human resources.
but i do hope to take you to some places you've never been to before.
many of you have been there.
let me take you to the real china.
she lives with her parents, her two brothers and her great-aunt.
and they share this great splendor with a very large pig.
why would we waste this money on you?"
she sent money back to her family.
what we saw was a natural experiment.
the village became a real standout.
the cause of our time is the brutality that so many people face around the world because of their gender.
how many of you think there are more males in the world?
there are three reasons why this is the case.
the second reason is it has to do with spending.
the last reason has to do with women being part of the solution, not the problem.
bill gates put it very well when he was traveling through saudi arabia.
and someone from this side of the room got up and said, "mr.
gates, we have here as our goal in saudi arabia to be one of the top 10 countries when it comes to technology.
so here is bill of arabia.
we don't have to expect a world where girls are bought and sold or killed.
in niger, one in seven women can expect to die during childbirth.
you know, for every woman who does die, there are 20 who survive but end up with an injury.
let me tell you about mahabuba.
she was married against her will at age 13.
so finally, they put her at the edge of the village in a hut.
and the next morning, she knew if she could get to a nearby village where there was a foreign missionary, she would be saved.
the doctors and nurses there noticed that she was not only a survivor, she was really clever, and they made her a nurse.
let me tell you about saima.
she was beaten every single day by her husband, who was unemployed.
this is when she had her second daughter.
they sold the milk for cash.
so you see how transformative little bits of help can be.
i will just leave you with two things.
one is that research shows that once you have all of your material needs taken care of -- which most of us, all of us, here in this room do -- research shows that there are very few things in life that can actually elevate your level of happiness.
one of those things is contributing to a cause larger than yourself.
and that is the story of an aid worker in darfur.
here was a woman who had worked in darfur, seeing things that no human being should see.
she was in her grandmother's backyard, and she saw something that made her break down in tears.
what that was was a bird feeder.
and she realized that she had the great fortune to be born in a country where we take security for granted, where we not only can feed, clothe and house ourselves, but also provide for wild birds so they don't go hungry in the winter.
and she realized that with that great fortune comes great responsibility.
feel happier and help save the world.
and the reason i'm saying this is that you may have the idea this problem is relatively recent.
and that it's accelerating even faster than what we thought was the worst case just a few years back.
so that red line there was something that a lot of skeptics said the environmentalists only put in the projections to make the projections look as bad as possible, that emissions would never grow as fast as that red line.
no, this is really important to have this sense of scale.
all we lack is the action to actually spend the money to put those into place.
what i'm going to talk to you about tonight is stuff we might do if we did nothing.
i spent time skiing across the sea ice for weeks at a time in the high arctic.
and i know for certain that that will work.
and there are times you might like to do something quick.
and the answer seems to be yes.
the one new thing is this essay.
not as something that was foolproof, but as an idea to think about.
and so people took him seriously when he said we should think about this, even though there will be some ozone impacts.
and in fact, he had some ideas to make them go away.
and i was actually lying in bed thinking one night.
one of the problems with sulfates is they fall out quickly.
and so you see a net force away from the sun.
whether this idea is right or some other idea is right, i think it's almost certain we will eventually think of cleverer things to do than just putting sulfur in.
the one thing about this is it gives us extraordinary leverage.
and the box has two knobs.
you might imagine that we would fight wars over that box.
because we have no way to agree about where to set the knobs.
and different people will have different places they want it set.
they have no interest in crazy ideas like engineering the whole planet.
and so i guess my view on this is not that i want to do it -- i do not -- but that we should move this out of the shadows and talk about it seriously.
i'll give you two different ways to think about this problem that are the beginning of my thinking about how to think about it.
but what we need is not just a few oddballs like me thinking about this.
we have a lot of leverage.
but we don't really know how quickly we have to cut them.
and that's a very different way to look at the problem.
but there is a problem with that view.
a very small amount of money would get us some.
but i have a lot of reservations.
i think there is a serious problem: as you talk about this, people begin to think they don't need to work so hard to cut emissions.
right now we may think of a big, rich country like the u.s.
and i wanted to see the center with my own eyes, but what i came away with is a photograph.
and then the text functions as this cruel anchor that kind of nails it to the ground.
and in this i really wanted it to resemble an early still-life painting, so i spent some time with the smells and items.
and in this particular photograph the body of a young boy has been used to reenact a crime scene.
he actually made it to adulthood.
and i put them into my photograph.
and he served 10 years of a life sentence.
he served 18 years of a death sentence.
he ended up serving 18 and a half years of an 80 year sentence for rape and robbery.
he served seven years of a 70 year sentence in kentucky.
my first point is that the pursuit of happiness is obligatory.
some people say this is because we have better diagnosis, and more people are being found out.
now the good news here is that if you take surveys from around the world, we see that about three quarters of people will say they are at least pretty happy.
but this does not follow any of the usual trends.
we also find that people are more averse to losing than they are happy to gain.
we have a system that is really ancient, and really there for physical danger.
if we were only governed by pleasure we would not survive.
we really have two command posts.
so let me go forward to the new science of happiness.
and that happiness is a whole other end of the equation.
and of course we know this intuitively, that happiness is not just the absence of misery.
but somehow it was not put forward until very recently, seeing these as two parallel systems.
so that the body can both look for opportunity and also protect itself from danger, at the same time.
people have also wanted to deconstruct.
babies love the taste of sweet and hate the taste of bitter.
they like to look at beautiful faces rather than plain faces.
there was once a statement made by a psychologist that said that 80 percent of the pursuit of happiness is really just about the genes, and it's as difficult to become happier as it is to become taller.
this was originally seen as a system that was the pleasure system of the brain.
and the rat would just keep pressing that bar thousands and thousands and thousands of times.
it turned out that it wasn't, that it really is a system of motivation, a system of wanting.
it makes something look so attractive that you just have to go after it.
and we see here the smile.
so if you want to unmask a true look of happiness, you will look for this expression.
and if you stick your tongue out at this baby, the baby will do the same.
but there are ways in which our evolutionary history can really trip us up.
so clearly there is some effect.
and one of the problems with money is materialism.
what happens when people pursue money too avidly, is they forget about the real basic pleasures of life.
so one of the things is that it really takes over.
women had a whole different set of value shifts.
i end with a few quotes.
then do what you have to do."
and the animal comes back for a food reward.
now why would you use rats?
and you should see the pride in the eyes of these people.
but let me bring you to a very different problem.
it gets a click sound and comes for the food reward.
the way forward for us is now to standardize this technology.
just think about this problem for a second.
and this is truly the most amazing thing in the world.
this is what i spoke about in the last ted.
for one thing they must be involved in things like imitation and emulation.
now there is another kind of mirror neuron, which is involved in something quite different.
but a subset of them will fire even when i watch somebody else being touched in the same location.
if the arm has been removed and you have a phantom, and you watch somebody else being touched, you feel it in your phantom.
the first is to tell you something about pollen, i hope, and to convince you that it's more than just something that gets up your nose.
there is an invisible beauty all around us, each grain with a story to tell ...
one out of two of you women will be impacted by cardiovascular disease in your lifetime.
and not enough is being done about this.
heart disease kills more women at all ages than breast cancer.
we often can't think of a young woman who has heart disease.
and that is the 40 years that women have advocated.
women are living longer than ever.
and she wanted to study the talmud.
and so how did she get educated then?
she had to look like a man.
she had to make other people believe that she looked like a man and she could have the same rights that the men had.
it was a very big deal for her to become director.
why are more and more women dying of ischemic heart disease?
so what do you think happens to these gals?
and because of the common knowledge of how women and men get fat.
when we watch people become obese, where do men get fat?
and those little red boxes are deaths.
if you ask, what is the big difference between women and men physiologically?
why are there women and men?
because women bring new life into the world.
these are female and male stem cells.
what has happened in the last 15 years with this work?
now are we happy with this?
we still have two to three more women dying for every man.
so this is where we are, but we have a long row to hoe.
too many lives are at stake.
so what do we need to do?
they have put their money where their mouth is and they have done advocacy and they have joined campaigns.
this is what we need to do with heart disease now.
so we have these feast and famine cycles.
so if we can be as good as breast cancer and give women this new charge, we have a lot of lives to save.
so thank you for your attention.
we plate them into dishes that we sometimes call petri dishes.
not only that, but they can also be used for disease models.
and so we need to do better at copying their natural environment to get them to thrive.
what else do we know about the heart?
so this brings me to lesson number one: life can do a lot with very little.
what does this mean for us?
i invite you to talk about this with me further, and in the meantime, i wish you luck.
deb roy: the birth of a word
so here we are flying through a day in our home as we move from sunlit morning through incandescent evening and, finally, lights out for the day.
so you're looking at a piece of what is by far the largest home video collection ever made.
so we're looking here at one of the first things we started to do.
why were certain words born before others?
this is one of the first results that came out of our study a little over a year ago that really surprised us.
and all of the data, we aligned based on the following idea: every time my son would learn a word, we would trace back and look at all of the language he heard that contained that word.
my son is leaving red ink.
and we think that these affect the way language is learned.
and what this data leaves in its wake is a landscape.
and just for contrast, we can do this with any word.
think of mass media as providing common ground and you have the recipe for taking this idea to a whole new place.
and the same idea now can be built up.
and if you put them on one plain, a second plain is where the content lives.
and then the important third dimension.
and so just to return to my son, when i was preparing this talk, he was looking over my shoulder, and i showed him the clips i was going to show to you today, and i asked him for permission -- granted.
and he was quiet for a moment.
and just as i was having that thought, he looked up at me and said, "so that when i grow up, i can show this to my kids?"
so i want to leave you with one last memorable moment from our family.
this is the first time our son took more than two steps at once -- captured on film.
and i really want you to focus on something as i take you through.
and this is the part of the brain that will recognize what something is.
and what it does is locates the object in physical body space.
and this is deep inside of the brain.
so what can we learn about this?
so the point of this is what?
the lessons for us are three-fold.
and it's very powerful because everyone gets to see everything else.
here what we can do is look at sustainability, quite literally.
so a team can actually look at all the key components that heat the structure and make choices and then see the end result that is visualized on this screen.
this is the first house i built.
this is going up into the turret.
and then if you're smart enough, it goes on a basket on top of the washer.
in order to do what i do, you have to understand what causes waste in the building industry.
but the first cause of waste is probably even buried in our dna.
so i can show you an object you've never seen before.
throw it away so nobody can use it and put a new one in."
that causes a lot of waste in the building industry.
the fourth thing is labor is disproportionately more expensive than materials.
but once in a while you get access to the control room, and then you can kind of mess with the dials.
we had a wind last night.
but you know what they did?
you can snap through it in maybe two years if you read eight hours a day.
in there he talked about the divided self.
right there is reason enough to have uniforms.
and when i get a little bit of press, i hear from people all over the world.
and we may have invented excess, but the problem of waste is worldwide.
but when you get that opportunity, you get a little nervous.
and one of the questions from which i learned a lot was this one: "which country has the highest child mortality of these five pairs?"
they would be right half of the cases.
but the students are not there.
this is where i realized that there was really a need to communicate, because the data of what's happening in the world and the child health of every country is very well aware.
this country over here is china.
here i put life expectancy at birth, from 30 years in some countries up to about 70 years.
and 1962, there was really a group of countries here that was industrialized countries, and they had small families and long lives.
and these were the developing countries: they had large families and they had relatively short lives.
now what has happened since 1962?
we want to see the change.
or have these developing countries got smaller families and they live here?
or have they got longer lives and live up there?
they move up into that corner.
and in '90s, we have the terrible hiv epidemic that takes down the life expectancy of the african countries and all the rest of them move up into the corner, where we have long lives and small family, and we have a completely new world.
by the end of the year, the family planning started in vietnam and they went for smaller families.
but there are people all the way.
we heard it in other forms.
the country club of the u.n.
and they are over here on this side.
and how did it look like if we go back in time, to about 1970?
then there was more of a hump.
and the best projection from the world bank is that this will happen, and we will not have a divided world.
now i have money on that axis, and i have the possibility of children to survive there.
health is there and better health is up there.
i can split south asia here.
and that includes all the children of the foreign workers who are in the country.
the differences are much bigger than the weakness of the data.
and we get the whole pattern here of the world, which is more or less like this.
and we have seen how countries move in different directions like this, so it's sort of difficult to get an example country which shows the pattern of the world.
but i would like to bring you back to about here at 1960.
and if we move back again, here, and we put on trails on them, like this, you can see again that the speed of development is very, very different, and the countries are moving more or less in the same rate as money and health, but it seems you can move much faster if you are healthy first than if you are wealthy first.
you have to invest in health.
you have to train health staff.
we must be much more detailed.
we find that students get very excited when they can use this.
and what do we hear when we go around?
and we would like flowers to grow out on the net.
i have a good news that the present, new head of u.n.
so we can see a lot happening in data in the coming years.
but i think it's very important to have all this information.
we need really to see it.
it takes some time to change for this, but on the axises, you can quite easily get any variable you would like to have.
i end now with the world.
these countries are lifting more than the economy and will be very interesting to follow this over the year, as i would like you to be able to do with all the publicly funded data.
and then, i hope maybe i have at least five minutes to say what makes me tick now.
in back of me is a picture of me when i was 17.
i was at the university of chicago, in my third year, and i was in my third year because the university of chicago let you in after two years of high school.
and by the age of 11, i was no longer going to sunday mass, and going on birdwatching walks with my father.
and there was the big question of, how did you copy the information?
so i had a really quite happy life at indiana.
and so when i got my ph.d., i should go and search for dna.
you can read it in about two hours.
and -- but then i went to a meeting in italy.
most people believed it was proteins.
so i went to cambridge, because it was really the best place in the world then for x-ray crystallography.
i went there without knowing him.
so we were told to build no more models; we were incompetent.
and we kept telling the people in london that linus pauling's going to move on to dna.
and they had the wisdom to say "no."
but there was ones in the literature.
and so, one day peter came in and he said he was peter pauling, and he gave me a copy of his father's manuscripts.
i just put them down like they were in the books.
and we knew we were right.
and we knew it was big because, you know, if you just put a next to t and g next to c, you have a copying mechanism.
and you copy it by going from strand-separating.
but there is what we did when we didn't know where to go forward: we formed a club and called it the rna tie club.
he was one of the members.
when we found the structure of dna, i gave my first talk at cold spring harbor.
and then, they learned how to read the letters for the code.
and you can see on the top that cancers which are bad show insertions or deletions.
before you get treated for cancer, you should really look at this technique, and get a feeling of the face of the enemy.
so the first disease he looked at is autism.
and the reason we looked at autism is we had the money to do it.
and you can see here, there are a lot of them.
and we thought we'd probably have to look at several hundred before we got the picture.
but as you can see, there's seven out of 20 had a change which was very high.
there was a time in my life when everything seemed perfect.
everyone i met, i felt i knew them for as long as i could remember.
and i want to share with you how i came to that place and what i've learned since i left it.
and the police are waiting for the fire department to arrive to cut apart the vehicle to extract the body of the driver.
and the reason i think it would be so interesting to you is because consciousness is so interesting.
and this is how we began.
and the reason it connects us with consciousness today is that all of us still today, the very first shape we draw as a child is a circle.
and then the next thing we do is we put a dot in the center of the circle.
and that comes down right way to the present with the dollar bill in the united states, which has on it an eye of providence.
and here are some of the other categories, if you look at the whole planet.
the world health organization tells us that depression is the number one disease on earth in terms of years lived with disability.
we find that the number two source of disability is depression in the age group of 15 to 44.
but if you look into the eye of consciousness, that single eye you can see, i'm looking down, but let me tell you how i felt at that point.
that is the consequence of more than a third of the right side of my brain being destroyed by the stroke.
and that was when i started to write a book, because i didn't think it was miraculous.
i thought there were miraculous elements, but i also didn't think it was right that one should have to struggle and search for answers when this is a pandemic within our society.
and you can see here there are three columns.
it meant that when i was given two and a half hours to take a test that anyone here would take in 50 minutes, i might score an f.
and let me show you what happened to the right-hand column when i did my cognitive training over a period of time.
this is not supposed to occur.
but that person could be identified as having a learning disability.
so my teeth actually hold my jaw in the correct position.
-- let me simply point out to you, if i ask you tomorrow to put one grain of sand between your teeth and go for a nice long walk, how far would you last before you had to remove that grain of sand?
now just trying putting a few grains of sand between your teeth and see the difference it makes.
and in the following months and years, i felt the neurological flow of life itself returning.
this is it being held in the hand.
so two of them implanted in the body would weigh less than a dime.
five of them would still weigh less than a rupee coin.
where does it go inside the body?
it has been simulated and tested to endure in the body corrosion-free for over 80 years.
so it goes in and it stays there.
the main unit will then go inside the brain.
and in closing, i want to share the personal reason why this meant so much to me and changed the direction of my life.
and during my time in coma, she had been laid to rest in her hometown of phoenix.
now in the dark years that followed, i had to work out what remained for me if everything that made today special was gone.
i believe that we can all rise and shine.
just stay here for a second.
and so i was sitting in this restaurant, waiting for a man to come by who obviously would have some difficulty ...
i didn't expect that person that i was going to meet to be him.
and then i was amazed at what role technology played in your recovery.
and we have his book outside in the bookshop.
so i think this one detail went past people really quick.
tell a little bit about what you're wearing on your leg.
and what i would love to add because i didn't have time ...
because what i didn't say in my talk is this is actually exoskeletal.
so he saw a need and he stepped in.
now it may seem kind of strange that such a thing can actually be patented, but it does happen all the time.
and this can take quite a while.
so would you mind giving us your best and final offer?"
now what did i learn from this case?
secondly, make it clear from the beginning that either you have no money at all or that you would rather spend money with your attorney fighting the troll than actually giving them the money.
finally, make sure that you can tell them that you will make this process as annoying and as painful and as difficult as possible for them.
so what does all this mean?
and what do they do with that money?
now this is the point in the talk where i'm supposed to come up with some kind of a solution for the patent system.
and the problem with that is that there are two very large industry groups that have different outcomes in mind for the patent system.
these girls just needed a way to invite their fathers into their lives on their own terms.
it was off and running before i could even blink my eyes, but even if i could have slowed down those girls, i wouldn't have, because one thing that i have learned from over a decade of working with girls is that they already know what they need.
the wisdom lives inside of them.
so we had a dance, and girls and their fathers came in multitudes.
they were dressed to the nines.
at this moment, i saw an opportunity for the girls to rise to the occasion and to become their own heroes.
because one thing he did know, that when fathers are connected to their children, it is less likely that they will return.
the girls were dressed in their sunday best, and the fathers traded in their yellow and blue jumpsuits for shirts and ties.
the fathers and daughters even experienced an opportunity to have a physical connection, something that a lot of them didn't even have for a while.
so we needed to create something that they could take with them.
this was going to be used as a touchstone so when they started to miss each other and feel disconnected, they could reconnect through this image.
because our daddies are our mirrors that we reflect back on when we decide about what type of man we deserve, and how they see us for the rest of our lives.
i have had my father in my life always.
and that is why it is extremely special for me to make sure that these girls are connected to their fathers, especially those who are separated because of barbed wires and metal doors.
we have just created a form for girls who have heavy questions on their heart to be in a position to ask their fathers those questions and given the fathers the freedom to answer.
because we know that the fathers are even leaving with this one thought: what type of woman am i preparing to put in the world?
because a father is locked in does not mean he should be locked out of his daughter's life.
but to get us started, i want to ask if everyone could just close your eyes for two seconds and try and think of a technology or a bit of science that you think has changed the world.
and it's a great thing actually that nobody's had to think about it here today because it means that we can take this for granted.
we can take it completely for granted.
even here in california, if we were to go back just a few years, it was a very different story.
we made this map for jon to try to show him exactly where polio still exists.
they had come from thousands of miles away.
and not only that, but when they came into these countries, then they got on commercial jetliners probably and they traveled even farther to other places like russia, where, for the first time in over a decade last year, children were crippled and paralyzed by a disease that they had not seen for years.
but the message was very clear.
this is one of the very few viruses in the world where there are big enough cracks in its armor that we can try to do something truly extraordinary.
the first is that, when we started trying to eradicate polio about 20 years ago, more than twice as many countries were infected than had been when we started off with smallpox.
and there were more than 10 times as many people living in these countries.
so you could get around the disease; you could vaccinate around the disease and cut it off.
and in each of those, it was only part of the country.
he lives in a family home there with his eight brothers and sisters.
his right leg was paralyzed in 2004.
this is the kind of commitment now we're seeing to try and reach all of the children we've been missing.
and it started rolling off the production lines and into the mouths of children around the world.
and only two years ago, people were saying that this is impossible.
but as david cameron of the united kingdom said about a month ago when he was talking about polio, "there's never a wrong time to do the right thing."
and we are at a crossroads right now in this great effort over the last 20 years.
where would you say we need to be the smartest?
and is it easy to raise that money?
it sounds like a lot of money; it is a lot of money.
well today we're here to share with you a message that we have learned from a very important and special character -- this leopard.
we found this leopard in a 2,000-year-old baobab tree in africa, the same tree that we found her mother in and her grandmother.
bj: well we certainly did spend a lot of time with her -- in fact, more time than even her mother did.
when her mother would go off hunting, we would stay and film.
so we felt that that day was the day that she really earned her name.
but only by getting up close to these animals and spending time with them can we actually even reach out and dig out these personal characters that they have.
but all the places we get stuck in really have great views.
we're on the edge through a large part of the time.
and i have to tell you that it was a disturbing night for me.
i had tears rolling down my cheeks.
and i do believe you should stay with us.
and you can see the start of it here.
but by the same token, you can get your hope back again.
we were spending so much time with this leopard and getting to understand her individualism, her personal character, that maybe we were taking it a little bit far.
but at the same time, we were concerned that if she created this as a habit and jumped into somebody else's car, it might not turn out the same way -- she might get shot for that.
but nothing prepared us for what happened next in our relationship with her, when she started hunting.
and of course, we knew now that she was going to survive.
so what we watched over the next couple of hours was very unique.
it was absolutely amazing when she picked it up to safety, protecting it from the hyena.
and over the next five hours, she took care of it.
we realized that we actually don't know everything, and that nature is so unpredictable, we have to be open at all times.
she had this maternal instinct, much like a young girl on her way to womanhood, and so this really took us to this new level of understanding that personality.
they ended up sleeping for hours.
we had to deal with them with respect and celebrate them.
so we have a real problem here, no more so than the lions do, the male lions.
so we've estimated that between 20 30 lions are killed when one lion is hanging on a wall somewhere in a far-off place.
we respect and celebrate each other as a man and a woman, as a community and as part of this planet, and we need to continue that.
what is it that makes us capable of supposing anything, and does this tell us anything about what we can suppose?
after all, it seems obvious that the earth is large and motionless, the sun small and mobile.
who would screw around with an army that could do that?
we have this tendency to think that only solid, material things are really things at all.
the beautiful thing is that it moves bodily.
how else would you remember it?
not a single atom that is in your body today was there when that event took place.
matter flows from place to place and momentarily comes together to be you.
if that doesn't make the hair stand up on the back of your neck, read it again until it does, because it is important."
the nature of the model depends on the kind of animal we are.
and the argument would be exactly the same as for the bats.
but the atoms in the hand could all just happen to move the same way at the same time, and again and again.
one way to think about that is by counting planets.
i want to end by applying the idea of middle world to our perceptions of each other.
or are our brains so versatile and expandable that we can train ourselves to break out of the box of our evolution?
as you can see with your own eyes.
so it kind of flips things on its head a little bit.
we can also use cymatics as a looking glass into nature.
then on the right we can see a cymatically created snowflake.
and there is thousands of these.
so what does this all mean?
but consider for a moment that sound does have form.
learn how to help at http://www.xdrtb.org
our political and military leaders were telling us one thing and photographers were telling us another.
and i understood that documentary photography has the ability to interpret events from their point of view.
it gives a voice to those who otherwise would not have a voice.
but how can i tell an eight-year-old boy that his father is a politician?"
the same, i felt, was true in almost every single one of the middle and developing countries that i went to, and to some extent the same is true of us.
is the answer to just give up on the idea of democracy?
what is wrong with the people that we have chosen?
the problem is that you chose them."
but in order to do so we need to get away from instrumental arguments.
we need to get away from saying democracy matters because of the other things it brings.
we need to get away from feeling, in the same way, human rights matters because of the other things it brings, or women's rights matters for the other things it brings.
why should we get away from those arguments?
it's not that it guarantees peace with itself or with its neighbors.
it is a state of mind.
and the second thing we should do is understand the genius of our societies.
that can mean different things in different countries.
and the reason it shouldn't be is that on any day you can go into trending topics.
negroponte started his book with a story about how hard it is to build connections in the world of atoms.
it can be anywhere in the world at any time.
and it's going to change the world as we know it.
we look at the framework that makes it possible to live in this connected world.
we look at a map like this one, and it looks like the entire world is flat because everything is a hop or two away.
when you start looking at what actually flows on top of these networks, you get a very different picture.
there are parts of the world that are very, very well connected.
this is a problem we have to solve.
nor do i think we are by ourselves, actually going to solve the problem.
but the more that i think about it, the more that i think that a few things that we have learned along the way are interesting lessons for how we would rewire if we we wanted to use the web to have a wider world.
the first thing you have to consider is that there are parts of the world that are dark spots in terms of attention.
and i used to think that a dark spot on this map basically meant you're not going to get media from there because there are more basic needs.
they were doing something much simpler.
but what happened was that madagascar went through a violent coup.
we use a lot of search.
maybe we should be looking at it.
the problem with this is that essentially what you end up getting after a while is the wisdom of the flock.
and it's very, very hard to get information from the other flocks, from the other parts of the world where people getting together and talking about their own interests.
and in that sense of trying to get you out of your normal orbit, and to try to get you to pay attention to a story about someone who's given up smoking for the month of ramadan, she has to know something about a global audience.
she has to know something about what stories are available.
i can ask her what to read.
and his reason for this is not just that he wants to master muay thai boxing.
for some of us it might be music.
for some of us it might be food.
for a lot of us it might be literature or writing.
but there are all these different techniques that allow you to go out and look at the world and find your place within it.
the goal of my talk here is not to persuade the people in this room to embrace your xenophilia.
that always makes hair stand up and people shake a lot."
can you bring one of them to us?"
so these three psychiatrists, after about two or three weeks of observation, laid him down on a table, connected his temples to a very small source of current.
so people would have a real grand mal seizure.
and patients' rights groups seemed to get very upset about the kinds of things that they would witness.
now, why am i telling you this story at this meeting?
and let me tell you this story.
to use the word bad would be perhaps the understatement of the year.
it had to do with being brought up in a family where no one spoke english, no one could read or write english.
it had to do with death and disease and lots of other things.
i know some people who got tenure in that place with lies like that.
so i was one of their failures.
because by the time i got out of that unit, i was not functional at all.
i could hardly see five feet in front of myself.
and they tried everything they had.
nothing happened except that i got jaundiced from one of these things.
remember when you were a kid, and you had to step on every line?
well, i was a grown man who had all of these rituals, and it got so there was a throbbing, there was a ferocious fear in my head.
so they decided there was no therapy, there was no treatment.
he was 27 years old, and he would meet with me two or three times a week.
and he asked to meet with the senior staff, and they agreed to meet with him because he was very well thought of in that place.
i know this man better than any of you.
i have met with him over and over again.
i really honestly believe that the basic problem here is pure depression, and all of the obsessional thinking comes out of it.
and you know why they agreed?
and he went back to them, and they agreed to do another 10.
again, not a single one of them -- i think there are about seven or eight of them -- thought this would do any good.
i need some thing to say to myself when i begin thinking obsessionally, obsessively.
and she would be fine for a little while.
i stayed there for three years.
my children came back to live with us.
we had two more children after that.
went right back into the university and began to write books.
well, those of you who know some of these books know that one is about death and dying, one is about the human body and the human spirit, one is about the way mystical thoughts are constantly in our minds, and they have always to do with my own personal experiences.
i really have it figured out, so that i can advise people about death and dying, so that i can talk about mysticism and the human spirit.
so one of the reasons that i have come here to talk about this today is to -- frankly, selfishly -- unburden myself and let it be known that this is not an untroubled mind that has written all of these books.
you can be thrown off the track.
and for those who are older, who have lived through perhaps not something as bad as this, but who have lived through difficult times, perhaps where they lost everything, as i did, and started out all over again, some of these things will seem very familiar.
i went to his home town.
and i went looking for chicken.
he played an important role in the taiping rebellion, which was a war started by a guy who thought he was the son of god and the baby brother of jesus christ.
this is a dish called magic bowl that i discovered.
this material actually has some traits that make it seem almost too good to be true.
and the material looks something like this.
so the question is, how do you reinvent something that has been around for five millennia?
and so we get this starting material.
and so this starting material is back to the basic building block.
they find their way to self-assemble.
and so what does that mean?
so we tried something out, and we wrote a message in a piece of silk, which is right here, and the message is over there.
and much like in the dvd, you can read it out optically.
and this requires a stable hand, so this is why i decided to do it onstage in front of a thousand people.
and the most remarkable feat is that my hand actually stayed still long enough to do that.
so once you have these attributes of this material, then you can do a lot of things.
but you can do other things.
and you can think of different formats.
what you see there on the screen is a human hair superimposed on the needle that's made of silk -- just to give you a sense of size.
and so you have here a little example of a small skull -- what we call mini yorick.
i mean, why would you want to do all these things for real?
and so what you see there is the difference.
and what you see is that the film on the bottom releases what is inside it.
so it knows something about the subject; it knows about the length.
i actually have no idea what my robot is going to do today.
and also i can use each one of you as the acting coach to our future robot companions.
the bad news is that you only have 24 hours to live."
five hundred years without a war.
one of them falls to the ground.
he does not seem to be breathing.
but to be completely honest with you, i kind of love television.
actually, as soon as someone turns it on, i go into the other room and read.
so thank you all for being a part of it.
my father is no such man.
here is my father at age 19.
when i was a child i knew nothing about this, of course.
this is me in the middle making faces.
i was in high school and got a bad grade, a rare event for me, so i decided to hide it from my parents.
i went to hide in my bedroom, under the blankets, and then i waited for my father to come back from work with, one could say, much apprehension.
he was laughing so hard, he could not stop and he was holding my assignment in his hand.
there i would hear people say my father was a "moudjahid" and that means "fighter."
and in my head i would be thinking that "doing" a war meant being a soldier.
but knowing my father, and how he kept saying that he was a pacifist and non-violent, i found it very hard to picture him with a helmet and gun.
but the document i happened to see that would help us build a case for the authorities was a document from the army that thanked my father for his work on behalf of the secret services.
and later, i told myself that one day i would have to question him.
and then i became a mother and had a son, and finally decided it was time -- that he absolutely had to talk to us.
i managed to convince him that it was important for us, but possibly also for other people that he shared his story.
he decided to tell it to me and i made a book, from which i'm going to read you some excerpts later.
my father was born in argentina.
the whole family came to settle in france in the '30s.
so at the age of 14 my father had to work.
during that time the war was happening and his mother was killed when he was 15.
this coincided with the time when he threw himself body and soul into chemistry because it was the only consolation for his sadness.
all this to tell you that if my father became a forger, actually, it was almost by accident.
it was my grandfather who decided they needed false documents.
my father had been instilled with such respect for the law that although he was being persecuted, he'd never thought of false papers.
but it was he who went to meet a man from the resistance.
he asked the man to write "dyer."
but it was only the beginning.
as soon as he got to the lab, even though he was the youngest, he immediately saw that there was a problem with the making of forged documents.
he told himself it was necessary to make them from scratch.
this sense of responsibility for other people's lives when he was just 17 -- and also his guilt for being a survivor, since he had escaped the camp when his friends had not -- stayed with him all his life.
he was broke all of the time.
then there were the emotional sacrifices: how can one live with a woman while having so many secrets?
how can one explain what one does at night in the lab, every single night?
of course, there was another kind of sacrifice involving his family that i understood much later.
he also explained to me that i had a brother, too, and the first time i saw them i must have been three or four, and they were 30 years older than me.
in order to write the book, i asked my sister questions.
i wanted to know who my father was, who was the father she had known.
she explained that the father that she'd had would tell them he'd come and pick them up on sunday to go for a walk.
they would get all dressed up and wait for him, but he would almost never come.
and then he would not come.
and then i understood that asking my father so many questions was stirring up a whole past he probably didn't feel like talking about because it was painful.
and if he did not tell them, it was of course to protect them.
he was much younger in those days, and my father agreed to make false papers to enable him to come back and speak at a meeting.
he told me that those false papers were the most media-relevant and the least useful he'd had to make in all his life.
i understood much later that actually it was his own story my father would tell me to get me to sleep.
i asked him whether, considering the sacrifices he had to make, he ever had any regrets.
he told me that he would have been unable to witness or submit to injustice without doing anything.
he was persuaded, and he's still convinced that another world is possible -- a world where no one would ever need a forger.
my father is here in the room today.
you have the roman, the greek and the story as you know it.
the only phase, as we know it that can support humanity.
30 or so scientists around the world gathered and asked a question for the first time, "do we have to put the planet into the the pot?"
you get people out of poverty.
in fact, what we have to do over the next 40 years is much more dramatic and more exciting than what we did when we moved into the situation we're in today.
i was asked to come here and speak about creation.
you couldn't really say what you wanted to say; you had to invent ways of doing it.
that led me to another step of why i'm here today, is because i really liked media of all kinds.
on my way out, i had to break a fight apart.
the first works were actually objects.
and the half tombstone, for people who are not dead yet.
i wanted to take that into the realm of images, and i decided to make things that had the same identity conflicts.
so i decided to do work with clouds.
because clouds can mean anything you want.
but i was still working with sculpture, and i was really trying to go flatter and flatter.
and he did something that was very tricky.
he put together two different media from different periods of time.
and you become trapped into this kind of representation.
then you have this double take and see that it's actually something that existed in time.
and i wanted to deal with other subjects.
i had met a group of children in the caribbean island of saint kitts, and i did work and play with them.
it was just the name of the child, with the little thing you get to know of somebody that you meet very briefly.
because i was doing this while i was making these pictures, i realized that i could add still another thing i was trying to make a subject -- something that would interfere with the themes, so chocolate is very good, because it has -- it brings to mind ideas that go from scatology to romance.
and so i decided to make these pictures, and they were very large, so you had to walk away from it to be able to see them.
and i realized that i never worked with color, because i had a hard time controlling the idea of single colors.
so the first time i worked with colors was by making these mosaics of pantone swatches.
and you have to walk very far to be able to see it.
i tried to prove that he didn't do that thing in the salt lake.
and i felt that i would have to actually go there and make some earthworks myself.
now i would do very small ones, which would be like -- but under the same light, and i would show them together, so the viewer would have to really figure it out what one he was looking.
that's why we pay to go to magic shows and things like that.
what i want to talk to you about is what we can learn from studying the genomes of living people and extinct humans.
approximately one letter in a hundred will differ from a chimpanzee.
and generally we depict our ideas about this history in the form of trees like this.
farther back is there one shared with chimpanzees.
so what has now happened in the last few years is that there are account technologies around that allow you to see many, many pieces of dna very quickly.
well we can begin to ask those questions also.
this may be surprising, because we can, of course, look at these people and quite easily say where they or their ancestors came from.
and you can begin to compare it to the genomes of people who live today.
and one question that you may then want to ask is, what happened when we met?
and the way to ask that question is to look at the neanderthal that comes from southern europe and compare it to genomes of people who live today.
they should be equal, have no reason to be closer to one african than another african.
so we can then ask for denisovans the same things as for the neanderthals: did they mix with ancestors of present day people?
we learn perhaps many things, but one thing that i find sort of important to mention is that i think the lesson is that we have always mixed.
how can you build a sense of shared purpose among people of many ages and skill sets?
we went down to the airfield early because this is the army and you always go early.
and then you put on your reserve, and then you put on your heavy rucksack.
and you wait a little bit longer, because this is the air force teaching the army how to wait.
then they give you 10 minutes.
there's no way to get out of this at this point."
so nice air comes flowing in.
now you prepare for the inevitable.
you are going to hit the ground.
i always landed like a watermelon out of a third floor window.
and i realized that, if they had to go into combat, they would do what we had taught them and they would follow leaders.
and i realized that, if they came out of combat, it would be because we led them well.
and i also was raised with personal examples of leadership.
this was my father in vietnam.
and i still believe real leaders are like that.
and in one sentence, he lifted me, put me back on my feet, and taught me that leaders can let you fail and yet not let you be a failure.
but everything we do is in a different context.
more importantly, the force that i led was spread over more than 20 countries.
and instead of being able to get all the key leaders for a decision together in a single room and look them in the eye and build their confidence and get trust from them, i'm now leading a force that's dispersed, and i've got to use other techniques.
and i also have to build their faith.
it was sensitive, we had to go up the chain of command, convince them that this was the right thing to do and do all of this on electronic medium.
and so now what we had to do is i had to reach out to try to rebuild the trust of that force, rebuild their confidence -- me and them, and them and me, and our seniors and us as a force -- all without the ability to put a hand on a shoulder.
in reality, much of the force i led looked exactly like you.
we talked about the operation, and then at the end i did what i often do with a force like that.
it also produced something which i call an inversion of expertise, because we had so many changes at the lower levels in technology and tactics and whatnot, that suddenly the things that we grew up doing wasn't what the force was doing anymore.
and it forced me to become a lot more transparent, a lot more willing to listen, a lot more willing to be reverse-mentored from lower.
i stood in front of a screen one night in iraq with one of my senior officers and we watched a firefight from one of our forces.
and i remembered his son was in our force.
think about knowing that over time.
and you have to watch and take care of each other.
i learned they are the sinew which hold the force together.
and every ranger gets that same promise from every other ranger.
you can get knocked down, and it hurts and it leaves scars.
and if you're a leader, the people who count on you need you on your feet.
one of the things that happened very distinctly in the course of this exhibition is i was confronted with idea of how powerful images can be and people's understanding of themselves and each other.
and she pointed to the work on the left to tell me how problematic this image was, as it related, for her, to the idea of how black people had been represented.
and she pointed to the image on the right as an example, to me, of the kind of dignity that needed to be portrayed to work against those images in the media.
it is really in this sense of discovery that i have a new set of questions that i'm asking.
where can a museum exist as the place for us all to have this conversation?
i am continually amazed by the way in which the subject of race can take itself in many places that we don't imagine it should be.
i am always amazed by the way in which artists are willing to do that in their work.
it is why i look to art.
it is why i make exhibitions.
it's considering what it means for these artists to be both out in the world as their work travels, but in their communities as people who are seeing and thinking about the issues that face us.
and as many of us think about that continent and think about what if means to us all in the 21st century, i have begun that looking through artists, through artworks, and imagining what they can tell us about the future, what they tell us about our future, and what they create in their sense of offering us this great possibility of watching that continent emerge as part of our bigger dialogue.
what do i think about when i think about art?
we all want to make the world better -- but how?
we want to offer people an idea of what they can do about it.
the truth is, we can build a better world, and we can do so right now.
we know that people often change their behavior when they can see and understand the impact of their actions.
it would highlight the changes that are underway, but would more importantly give voice to the people who are willing to work to see a new world, a better world, come about.
it would give everyday citizens a chance to play a role in the protection of the planet.
we may not remember to bring our digital cameras with us wherever we go, but very few of us forget our phones.
you could even imagine a version of this scenario in which people actually build their own phones.
you could see that some kind of system like this would actually be a really good fit with larry brilliant's instedd project.
earth witness would take this further, linking what you see with what thousands or millions of other people see around the world.
it's kind of exciting to think about what might be accomplished if something like this ever existed.
we just need to open our eyes.
on top of that, those are the places from where trouble comes.
but i repeated this all over india and then through a large part of the world and noticed that children will learn to do what they want to learn to do.
they did all of this in four hours after seeing the computer for the first time.
at that point, i became a little more ambitious and decided to see what else could children do with a computer.
make yourself understood to the computer."
so they could do that on their own.
after that, i started to experiment with various other things that they might learn to do on their own.
and i was doing that in the field, so every time i would watch it and think of him.
if you leave it on the pavement and if all the adults go away, then they will show off with each other about what they can do.
this is what these children are doing.
so i left them with it.
i came back after two months, and the 26 children marched in looking very, very quiet.
well, one of the girls had taught herself to become the teacher.
can you show me some more?'"
she did that for two months.
so i came back to newcastle with these results and decided that there was something happening here that definitely was getting very serious.
i made them into groups of four.
each group of four can use one computer and not four computers."
a single child in front of a single computer will not do that.
the deal was that they would give me one hour of broadband time, sitting in their homes, one day in a week.
so how far can we go?
i sent all the teachers away from my group of 10 year-old students.
i tried a really hard one then.
and so, it was an incredibly painful time in my life, and yet it really started to give me the humility to start listening.
and so i started looking around, and i heard about a bakery that was run by 20 prostitutes.
and it was really the beginning of my understanding the power of language, and how what we call people so often distances us from them, and makes them little.
but that was clearly not as satisfying as painting a wall of blue like a morning sky.
and so then i learned that listening is not only about waiting, but it's also learning how better to ask questions.
and it taught me three lessons that i think are so important for us today, and certainly in the work that i do.
the first is that dignity is more important to the human spirit than wealth.
but as human beings, we also want to see each other, and we want to be heard by each other, and we should never forget that.
i think andrew pretty well covered that, so i will move to the third point, which is that markets alone also are not going to solve the problems of poverty.
but, having had a father with heart disease, and realizing that what our family could afford was not what he should have gotten, and having a good friend step in to help, i really believe that all people deserve access to health at prices they can afford.
i want to tell you two stories.
both of them are in africa.
the farmers get three to four times the yields that they would with maize.
and i think some of you may have visited -- these farmers are helped by kickstart and technoserve, who help them become more self-sufficient.
and so we came in with a second round of patient capital to a to z, a loan as well as a grant, so that a to z could play with pricing and listen to the marketplace, and found a number of things.
and when you listen to them, they'll also have a lot to say about what they like and what they don't like.
she was very much like those women sitting behind the sewing machines.
three of them died as babies.
she, like so many of the women i see at a to z, worked hard every day, understood what suffering was, had a deep faith in god, loved her children and would never have accepted a handout.
but because she had the opportunity of the marketplace, and she lived in a society that provided the safety of having access to affordable health and education, her children and their children were able to live lives of real purpose and follow real dreams.
and my wish, when i see those women, i meet those farmers, and i think about all the people across this continent who are working hard every day, is that they have that sense of opportunity and possibility, and that they also can believe and get access to services, so that their children, too, can live those lives of great purpose.
it takes investing in those entrepreneurs that are committed to service as well as to success.
some of you may recognize this image.
and we were very excited about this because, of course, they have a history of dancing with machines.
so we were really excited about working with them.
and we sort of started talking about what it is that they wanted.
so we were excited by this idea, and we started talking about exactly what it would look like.
and we wanted to make sure that we did something that would work for a music video.
they wanted us to make use of the space.
so what did we learn from all of this?
and so you have to start with it.
you know, we spent a lot of time ideating and even building some of these things.
these are all things that ended up not making it into the final machine.
and the wonderful elation that we had when we finally completed it.
it think we can do better than this.
unfortunately, at that time we did not know that that was not exactly where we should be looking, because we had to go much deeper in, and so the research came to a halt, and it was only taken up in 2000 thanks to the interest and the enthusiasm of the guinness family.
so students started to flow in, and we started to build technologies, because that's basically what we also needed in order to move forward and go and do fieldwork.
just think for a moment if science really could move in the field of authenticity of works of art.
it even says when it was made and also the location.
so that was a good result.
we came to understand and to prove that the brown coating that we see today was not done by leonardo da vinci, which left us only the other drawing that for five centuries we were not able to see, so thanks only to technology.
so all we need is one finger.
just wipe off and we see the elephant.
we're trying to give a future to our past in order to have a future.
there's more change going on than ever has occurred in the history of human life on earth.
when you have a new baby, by the time that kid gets out of high school more people will be added than existed on earth when i was born.
where it goes in the future is questioned.
and what's important is it just goes straight up through the top of the curve, and has no real limits to it.
our school systems are very flawed and do not reward you for the things that are important in life or for the survival of civilization; they reward you for a lot of learning and sopping up stuff.
let me just rush very quickly through things that we've done.
trying to have it fly straight is like trying to shoot an arrow with the feathered end forward.
it was a tough job, and boy it made me have a lot of respect for nature.
we got a lot of people thinking about electric cars, what you could do with them.
some can glide as flat as 60 feet forward for every foot of descent.
and we worked very closely with the whole thing being a team effort, and with wonderful results like that flight.
anything they do is certainly a team effort.
some things he showed as a celebration at the very end.
we couldn't bring one here to fly it and show you.
you can imagine yourself being a mouse or fly inside of it, looking out of its camera.
we get to do the classic.
we've had one of these fly nine miles through the air at 35 miles an hour with just a little battery in it.
you can do amazing things when you realize what nature has been doing all along.
in concluding, i want to get back to the big picture and i have just two final slides to try and put it in perspective.
every 25 years i do a picture.
and that time when this is happening is not 100 years or 500 years.
things are going on this decade, next decade; it's a very short time that we have to decide what we are going to do.
and if we can get some agreement on where we want the world to be -- desirable, sustainable when your kids reach your age -- i think we actually can reach it.
pm: last night we gave it a few too many turns and it tried to bash the roof out also.
and if this lands on you, i assure you it will not hurt you.
but if you reach out to grab it or hold it, you will destroy it.
we consider this to be sort of the spirit of ted.
and i wanted to make -- just -- but i want to make just two points.
and i believe that also is important.
you can think of it as a sort of a symbol for learning and ted that somehow gets you thinking of technology and nature, and puts it all together in things that are -- that make this conference, i think, more important than any that's taken place in this country in this decade.
and the next image i'm going to show is quite gruesome.
this one in particular sticks in my mind, because this is the first case of this disease that i saw myself.
they were too young to survive without their mother.
but in order for me to explain what that is, i need to spend just a couple of minutes talking more about cancer itself.
i took these back to the lab.
we found that all of these cancers shared the same dna.
think about that for a minute.
well the final piece of the puzzle came when we remember how devils behave when they meet each other in the wild.
most of the people that dr.
and i think that this is something that oncologists and epidemiologists should be aware of in the future.
but that does not mean that we should give up hope in the fight against cancer.
and why is it so difficult initially?
so that is what you get when you face reality.
but it needs to be done long-term.
they moved on to some other situation.
you can do that quite fast.
so the donors have to stick with this situation for at least a decade.
and now let me turn to the second approach, which is complimentary.
so we have to be disciplined and focus on things that are critical.
so i'm going to talk a little about each of them.
and why are jobs so important?
because they have nothing to do.
that is not a good idea.
just think what you have to do successfully to build a structure, using a lot of labor.
you can use yardstick competition, so they have to compete against each other for the resources.
they want to have the discipline and accountability.
and if all we do is put money in and close our eyes it's not just that the money is wasted -- that's the least of the problems -- it's that the money is captured.
the focus on the basic service delivery through these independent service authorities would have rescued basic services from their catastrophic levels, and it would have given ordinary people the sense that the government was doing something useful.
those two things are the huge shifts of power in our century.
when we talk about power transition, we often talk about the rise of asia.
it really should be called the recovery or return of asia.
if we looked at the world in 1800, you'd find that more than half of the world's people lived in asia and they made more than half the world's product.
and what that means is not that the age of the state is over.
and that ability to get others to want what you want, to get the outcomes you want without coercion or payment, is what i call soft power.
the narratives that we use now tend to be the rise and fall of the great powers.
the moral of this story is all these narratives about rise and fall and decline tell us a lot more about psychology than they do about reality.
the answer is it matters quite a lot.
let me give you an example from history.
the peloponnesian war was the great conflict in which the greek city state system tore itself apart two and a half millennia ago.
so there are people who are telling us this is going to be reproduced today, that what we're going to see is the same thing now in this century.
and the only way you can solve these problems -- and this is where many greatest challenges are coming in this century -- is through cooperation, through working together, which means that soft power becomes more important, that ability to organize networks to deal with these kinds of problems and to be able to get cooperation.
so as we think about power in this century, we want to get away from this view that it's all i win, you lose.
but unless you learn how to mix hard power with soft power into strategies that i call smart power, you're not going to deal with the new kinds of problems that we're facing.
so the key question that we need to think about as we look at this is how do we work together to produce global public goods, things from which all of us can benefit?
and that's going to be the good news dimension of what we need to think about as we think of power in the 21st century.
half the city is already below sea level.
other parts of the world have been hit by storms in even more devastating ways.
we should be preparing at every scale and at every opportunity.
and where will your people go?
how can we prepare and adapt?
we need to better understand how people make decisions in times of crisis, and why.
the stability this provides is giving the farmers the confidence to invest.
but there might be some changes in store that you might not imagine.
i think these are inspiring examples of what's possible when we feel empowered to plan for a world that will be different.
the world has a new mania.
imagine a student taking a giant test for three full days.
she studies 12 hours a day for three years to prepare.
music is the language of emotions.
like the harnessing of electricity in our cities or the fall of the berlin wall, english represents hope for a better future -- a future where the world has a common language to solve its common problems.
but let me get to the talk -- i see the clock is running.
i'm a public school teacher, and i just want to share a story of my superintendent.
why is this old table in your office?"
and as i grew up, i heard so much knowledge and so many insights and so much wisdom come out around this table, i began to call it the wisdom table.
and when he passed on, i took this table with me and brought it to my office, and it reminds me of him.
it all started back in 1977.
i was a young man, and i had been dropping in and out of college.
so i got a degree and it turned out to be education.
so this happened in 1978, and i was teaching many years later, and a friend of mine introduced me to a young filmmaker.
so we made a film and it turns out to be more than a story about me, more than a story about one teacher.
what i saw was my teachers coming through me.
and i have that kind of flash sometimes.
i am one of her teaching gestures.
i wanted to have them be immersed and learn the feeling of learning through their bodies.
there are four countries around the board.
and each country has a cabinet.
i offer them the job, they can turn it down, and then they choose their own cabinet.
and in the game, sometimes students actually form a peace force.
you're actually getting taught something like how to take care of the world.
now you may be wondering what all this complexity looks like.
there's a trust and an understanding and a dedication to an ideal that i simply don't have to do what i thought i had to do as a beginning teacher: control every conversation and response in the classroom.
so i'll just share with you some stories very quickly of some magical things that have happened.
this is the world peace game.
she was able to see the vectors and trend lines and intentions long before any of us and understand what was going to happen and made a philosophical decision to attack in a peace game.
we have a letter in the game.
so you have a little bit more thought before you commit to combat.
there was a parent visiting that day, just sitting in the back of the room.
one week he said, "those who go into battle and win will want to go back, and those who lose in battle will want to go back and win."
we have a lot of data, but i think sometimes we go beyond data with the real truth of what's going on.
this is about my friend brennan.
the way the game is won is all 50 problems have to be solved and every country's asset value has to be increased above its starting point.
there was no way they could win.
and i was just feeling so sad and dejected.
the parents were looking in the window.
some games are more about warfare.
and they find out what is right their own way, their own selves.
i worked there for two years, and i realized that i was not born to make trucks.
and it was a turning point.
so i just bought one specimen of everything which was sold on the roadside.
and one thing which i found was this black rubber.
and they have some wonderful properties.
push it and it becomes house shaped.
this square might look very square and prim.
ordinary people know about this because if you go to a village in india, they might not have gone to engineering college, but no one makes a roof placed like this.
and if i were to poke all the three legs of this in the three vertices of this triangle, i would make a tetrahedron.
you can play around with it.
and i thought this was so much better than making trucks.
and every time i go to a school, i see a gleam in the eyes of the children.
i see happiness in their faces.
and we have a slogan that the best thing a child can do with a toy is to break it.
and this is how you make a valve.
well we make lots and lots of pumps.
and this is the other one -- that you just take a straw, and you just put a stick inside and you make two half-cuts.
if i do it with both hands, you can see this fun mr.
but this is great fun for children.
they all study about the food chain.
and what you could use it for is just limited by your imagination.
if you take a smaller paper, you make a smaller flexagon.
he wrote a paper on this.
this is there for every child, and every child can enjoy this.
if you want to put a colored disk, well all these seven colors coalesce.
this is a kind of a blowing straw.
i just put this inside this.
now you can just make a little network like this and fold them and stick them together and make an icosahedron.
the other is that you keep blowing at it, keep making the sound, and you keep cutting it.
and when you get a very small one -- this is what the kids teach you.
well before i go any further, this is something worth sharing.
and this is wool over here.
and what a blind child can do is to just draw this.
there are 12 million blind children in our country -- who live in a world of darkness.
and what you can do is just, if you give it a twirl, well they just keep going on.
all of our old newspapers, we cut them into little squares.
and there were lots of passengers on the ship, and they were getting bored, so the captain invited them on the deck.
and the captain would wear a cap everyday and join in the regalia.
and we must not forget that he was the captain of the ship.
suddenly there was a storm and huge waves.
and all the ship can do is to dance and pitch along with the waves.
a huge wave comes and slaps the front and knocks it down.
so these two examples give a sense of what biomimicry can deliver.
and if we're to make progress with the sustainability revolution, i believe there are three really big changes we need to bring about.
it was a hell of a challenge, and it was actually examples from biology that provided a lot of the clues.
the next move was that we wanted to try and maximize the size of those hexagons.
and at the end of the project we worked out that the weight of that superstructure was actually less than the weight of the air inside the building.
and actually there are loads of examples in nature that you could turn to for similar solutions.
so now i want to go onto talking about the linear-to-closed-loop idea.
it was ending up in landfills.
now the really clever bit is what they did with the cardboard waste.
so they were paid to collect it from the restaurants.
when that was soiled, they were paid again to collect it.
some of you may recognize this.
it may come as a surprise to some of you to hear that quite large areas of what are currently desert were actually forested a fairly short time ago.
and when you think about nature, often you think about it as being all about competition.
some of you might be wondering what we would do with all the salts.
and it turns out that different things crystallize out at different stages.
and if you think about the carbon in that, that would have come out of the atmosphere, into the sea and then locked away in a building product.
now we would be able to make use of all that waste brine.
and i firmly believe that studying the way nature solves problems will provide a lot of the solutions.
and this is an important point.
so i want to talk today about an idea.
well, i myself have spent the past 30 years of my life working on three large projects that really try to take the idea of computation seriously.
you get something a little bit more complicated.
but if we keep running this for a while, we find out that although the pattern we get is very intricate, it has a very regular structure.
you can see a lot of diversity in the behavior here.
so let's take a closer look at rule number 30 here.
we could ask it something about the real world.
and it should be able to tell us that.
so wolfram alpha knows about lots and lots of kinds of things.
and i must say that i thought that step might just be plain impossible.
you can expect to see wolfram alpha technology showing up in more and more places, working both with this kind of public data, like on the website, and with private knowledge for people and companies and so on.
so what happens when you put these things together?
but actually i think the most exciting thing about this is that it really gives one the chance to democratize programming.
i mean, anyone will be able to say what they want in plain language.
this is just an example of one of these computable documents.
well, it turns out we can do very much the same kind of thing in the computational universe.
so could that be what's going on with our whole universe?
which means that it is irreducibly difficult to find out how it will really behave, and whether it matches our physical universe.
with every passing year, i realize how much more powerful the idea of computation really is.
i could go on about this at great length, but i won't.
i experienced this firsthand as a high school student in uganda.
we all know about the miracle of miniaturization.
and this is only done in four hours, 50 times faster than the current state of the art, at a cost that will be five to 500 times cheaper than the current options.
i invite your interest as well as your involvement in driving this vision to a point of practical reality.
ntaiya tells the fearless story of continuing on to college, and of working with her village elders to build a school for girls in her community.
the girls are brought up to be mothers.
when i was five years old, i found out that i was engaged to be married as soon as i reached puberty.
and everything i had to do from that moment was to prepare me to be a perfect woman at age 12.
i did everything that i needed to do to become a perfect wife.
i went to school not because the maasais' women or girls were going to school.
it's because my mother was denied an education, and she constantly reminded me and my siblings that she never wanted us to live the life she was living.
he came home once a year.
my mother worked hard in the farm to grow crops so that we can eat.
but when my father came, he would sell the cows, he would sell the products we had, and he went and drank with his friends in the bars.
i wanted to become a teacher.
i found out later that they are uncomfortable, but i admired it.
so i wanted to become a teacher.
and then i was just finishing my eighth grade, and that was a transition for me to go to high school.
once i go through this tradition, i was going to become a wife.
well, my dream of becoming a teacher will not come to pass.
so i talked -- i had to come up with a plan to figure these things out.
i did something that most girls have never done.
i told my father, "i will only go through this ceremony if you let me go back to school."
the reason why, if i ran away, my father will have a stigma, people will be calling him the father of that girl who didn't go through the ceremony.
it was a shameful thing for him to carry the rest of his life.
the actual day came, and we walked out of the house that we were dancing in.
they were all in a circle.
there was a woman sitting in the middle of it, and this woman was waiting to hold us.
and as she carried the knife, she walked toward me and she held the clitoris, and she cut it off.
i was so determined to be a teacher now so that i could make a difference in my family.
i met a young gentleman from our village who had been to the university of oregon.
just tell me how to get there."
but the problem is, my father is not the only father i have.
i got a scholarship but i needed to get myself here.
this should have been given to a boy.
so i went back and i had to go back to the tradition.
so i had to come up with something to do with the morning, because there's good news in the morning.
so i went to him very early in the morning, as the sun rose.
can you support me to go to america?"
i promised him that i would be the best girl, i will come back, anything they wanted after that, i will do it for them.
he gave me a list of another 15 men that i went -- 16 more men -- every single morning i went and visited them.
i was in a land of plenty.
i learned that that ceremony that i went through when i was 13 years old, it was called female genital mutilation.
i learned that it was against the law in kenya.
i learned that i did not have to trade part of my body to get an education.
i learned that my mom had a right to own property.
i learned that she did not have to be abused because she is a woman.
as i went back, i started talking to the men, to the village, and mothers, and i said, "i want to give back the way i had promised you that i would come back and help you.
we really need a school for girls."
because there had not been any school for girls.
and the reason they wanted the school for girls is because when a girl is raped when she's walking to school, the mother is blamed for that.
and i told them, i wanted them to show me a sign of commitment.
i want you to meet one of the girls in that school.
she was 12 years old, and we were taking girls who were in fourth grade.
and i looked at her, i remember that day, and i saw something beyond what i was seeing in angeline.
we gave her the opportunity to come to the class.
angeline wants to be a pilot so she can fly around the world and make a difference.
she was not the top student when we took her.
five months later, that is the difference that we are making.
as a new dawn is happening in my school, a new beginning is happening.
you are listening to me because you are here, very optimistic.
i want to challenge you today that to be the first, because people will follow you.
we are making a difference, so if you change your world, you are going to change your community, you are going to change your country, and think about that.
and we will live in a very peaceful world.
and the way i got interested in this was, i noticed in myself, when i was growing up, and until about a few years ago, that i would want to say thank you to someone, i would want to praise them, i would want to take in their praise of me and i'd just stop it.
and then my question became, am i the only one who does this?
but then, they hear from all the family and friends that the father told everybody else that he was proud of him, but he never told the son.
she, once a week, meets with her husband and says, "i'd really like you to thank me for all these things i did in the house and with the kids."
and praise really does have to be genuine, but she takes responsibility for that.
because what can you do with that data?
or you could actually meet my need.
i want you to true your wheels: be honest about the praise that you need to hear.
what do you need to hear?
go home and ask those questions, and then help the people around you.
and why should we care about this?
how can we have world peace with different cultures, different languages?
and thank you for being here, just showing up and changing the world with your ideas.
in order to understand this, we're going to step back and look a little bit at what's happened over the course of the last year and a half.
do you know what this was right here?
there was nothing to buy, unless you wanted to buy some rivets.
we are working our way back up to that 10 percent.
so we're starting to pay for things with money that we have.
and we're starting to be much more careful about how we save and how we invest.
no one is at the beach.
so there is a bright side to everything.
they found their consumer had more money at the beginning of the month, less at the end of the month.
so what they did is they started to change their packaging.
zynga has risen on the consumer's desire to not want to be locked in to fixed-cost.
they are rolling up their sleeves.
perfect example of that is patagonia.
this is about consumers working together to get what they want out of the marketplace.
and then they did a recent report i thought was fascinating.
then we also look at the idea of cow-pooling, which is the whole phenomenon of consumers organizing together to buy meat from organic farms that they know is safe and controlled in the way that they want it to be controlled.
well why not have a carrot?
you have to realize that you can't fight and control this.
you need to give it meaning.
and there is lots of really interesting examples here that we see.
so that becomes a very powerful force for them to make their brand more elastic.
what we're seeing with consumers right now is the ability for them to actually lead us forward out of this recession.
so, when we look back and step out at this and see the beginning of these trends that we're seeing in our data, we see a very hopeful picture for the future of america.
but before i go there, please allow me to share with you glimpses of my personal story.
from then on, i was raised as a single child by a single mother.
on the other hand was my grandmother, who also took care of me and was more spiritual, less educated and definitely less rational.
i asked her how she did this.
was it the power of praying?
it's an old eastern tradition based on the knowledge that it's not healthy for a human being to spend too much time staring at his own reflection.
my mother came home one day with a turquoise notebook and asked me if i'd be interested in keeping a personal journal.
what she didn't know was that i thought my life was terribly boring, and the last thing i wanted to do was to write about myself.
instead, i began to write about people other than me and things that never really happened.
now one other thing happened around this same time.
it was here that i had my first encounter with what i call the "representative foreigner."
when i ran out of the building at three in the morning, i saw something that stopped me in my tracks.
so i feel connected to each language in a different way.
at this stage, my grandmother, who had been watching the course of my life with increasing anxiety, started to include in her daily prayers that i urgently get married so that i could settle down once and for all.
yet as much as i love stories, recently, i've also begun to think that they lose their magic if and when a story is seen as more than a story.
and this is a subject that i would love to think about together.
i asked him what he meant by that.
he was looking for a turkish woman in the book because i happened to be one.
what i experienced as a child in that school in madrid is happening in the literary world today.
it was only because of our passports.
but i must quickly add that this tendency to see a story as more than a story does not solely come from the west.
but there were times when i wanted to remind both sides that this was fiction.
i want to love and celebrate fiction for what it is, not as a means to an end.
if it cannot take us there, it is not good literature.
as long as it comes from our hearts, we can write about anything and everything.
we should teach young people and ourselves to expand our hearts and write what we can feel.
we should get out of our cultural ghetto and go visit the next one and the next.
it is new media created from old media.
i think everything is a remix, and i think this is a better way to conceive of creativity.
progress happens when all the factors that make for it are ready and then it is inevitable."
here is the first ever slide-to-unlock.
that is all there is to it.
that is the last four years of lawsuits in the realm of smartphones.
it was an honor to be here.
i just want to show this picture.
is there any other use to exploration and science, other than just a sense of wonder?
it was taken by apollo 8 as it went around the back of the moon.
and it showed that for every $1 spent on apollo, 14 came back into the u.s.
and when they jump up to the next place they can be, and fall back down again, they emit light at particular colors.
i just wanted to show this picture because this is remarkable.
this is actually a picture of the spectrum of the sun.
but look at the number of black lines in that spectrum.
you can work it out on a piece of paper in a laboratory, get a telescope, swing it to the sky, and you find that there are no dead stars bigger than 1.4 times the mass of the sun.
what happens when you have a star that's right on the edge of that mass?
but that bright star there is actually one of the stars in the galaxy.
it was a picture of earth captured in that frame of saturn.
i think the earth has got a strange property that the farther away you get from it, the more beautiful it seems.
but that is not the most distant or most famous picture of our planet.
and that's a picture of me in front of it for scale.
and it took this picture of earth.
and i'd like to read you what sagan wrote about it, just to finish, because i cannot say words as beautiful as this to describe what he saw in that picture that he had taken.
the argument has always been made, and it will always be made, that we know enough about the universe.
they go in the order in which they were built.
the first house ever built on a block is house number one.
the second house ever built is house number two.
and my family and friends had gathered there to hear me speak.
imagine if you were quiet for 17 years and your mother was out in the audience, say.
but i turned around because i didnt recognize where my voice was coming from.
even though this one is kind of unusual, i want you to think about your own journey.
it disturbed me so much that i decided that i was going to give up riding and driving in motorized vehicles.
and so when i came in and i started walking around, people -- they just knew what was going on.
and maybe there was some truth to that, because i thought that if i started walking, everyone would follow.
and so i argued with people about that, i argued and i argued.
and so, on my 27th birthday i decided, because i argued so much and i talk so much, that i was going to stop speaking for just one day -- one day -- to give it a rest.
i got up in the morning and i didnt say a word.
because what i used to do, when i thought i was listening, was i would listen just enough to hear what people had to say and think that i could -- i knew what they were going to say, and so i stopped listening.
and in my mind, i just kind of raced ahead and thought of what i was going to say back, while they were still finishing up.
so on this first day i actually listened.
and it was very sad for me, because i realized that for those many years i had not been learning.
and so i decided id better do this for another day, and another day, and another day until finally, i promised myself for a year i would keep quiet because i started learning more and more and i needed to learn more.
so for a year i said i would keep quiet, and then on my birthday i would reassess what i had learned and maybe i would talk again.
now during that time -- those 17 years -- i walked and i played the banjo and i painted and i wrote in my journal, and i tried to study the environment by reading books.
and i decided that i was going to go to school.
i showed up in two years and they -- i tell this story because they really helped me.
there are two stories in montana.
but i use that story because they really wanted to help me.
they saw that i was really interested in the environment, and they really wanted to help me along the way.
i had 13 students when i first walked into the class.
all the students sat around and they went ...
i could see they were looking for the schedule, to see when they could get out.
they had to take that class with me.
two weeks later, everyone was trying to get into our class.
and i learned in that class -- because i would do things like this ...
now this was a discussion class and we were having a discussion.
but what i learned was that sometimes i would make a sign and they said things that i absolutely did not mean, but i should have.
i spent two years there writing on oil spills.
no one was interested in oil spills.
and i was the only one in the united states writing on oil spills.
my sister said maybe i should leave you alone, because you seem to be doing a lot better when youre not saying anything."
i put my banjo on and i walked all the way to the east coast, put my foot in the atlantic ocean -- it was seven years and one day it took me to walk across the united states.
and they also taught me about listening -- that they listened to me.
and its one of those things that came out of the silence, the listening to each other.
how could doing such a simple thing like walking and not talking make a difference?
well, my time at the coast guard was a really good time.
i got on a sailboat and i sailed down to the caribbean, and walked through all of the islands, and to venezuela.
i started talking because i had studied environment.
because if we are the environment, then all we need to do is look around us and see how we treat ourselves and how we treat each other.
the road turned into the jungle.
i was a prisoner and i needed to escape.
the prison that i was in was the fact that i did not drive or use motorized vehicles.
but the thing that was different was that every birthday, i asked myself about silence, but i never asked myself about my decision to just use my feet.
i had no idea i was going to become a u.n.
i had no idea i would have a ph.d.
and so i realized that i had a responsibility to more than just me, and that i was going to have to change.
i was going to have to change.
and i was afraid to change, because i was so used to the guy who only just walked.
i was so used to that person that i didnt want to stop.
but i know i needed to.
i know i needed to change, because it would be the only way that i could be here today.
and i know that a lot of times we find ourselves in this wonderful place where weve gotten to, but theres another place for us to go.
and we kind of have to leave behind the security of who weve become, and go to the place of who we are becoming.
and so, i want to encourage you to go to that next place, to let yourself out of any prison that you might find yourself in, as comfortable as it may be, because we have to do something now.
so if my voice can touch you, if my actions can touch you, if my being here can touch you, please let it be.
and i know that all of you have touched me while ive been here.
because we are the environment, and how we treat each other is really how were going to treat the environment.
so i want to thank you for being here and i want to end this in five seconds of silence.
or maybe you've called to mind the toddler phase when children are learning how to walk and talk and use a fork.
and so your answer to my question would be: learning begins at birth.
and that is that some of the most important learning we ever do happens before we're born, while we're still in the womb.
and those two roles came together for me in a book that i wrote called "origins."
i was myself pregnant while i was doing the research for the book.
and one of the most fascinating insights i took from this work is that we're all learning about the world even before we enter it.
and because the fetus is with her all the time, it hears her voice a lot.
my favorite experiment of this kind is the one that showed that the babies of women who watched a certain soap opera every day during pregnancy recognized the theme song of that show once they were born.
in one experiment, a group of pregnant women was asked to drink a lot of carrot juice during their third trimester of pregnancy, while another group of pregnant women drank only water.
what this means is that fetuses are effectively being taught by their mothers about what is safe and good to eat.
now it turns out that fetuses are learning even bigger lessons.
but before i get to that, i want to address something that you may be wondering about.
and often it does something more.
will it be born into a world of abundance or scarcity?
will it be safe and protected, or will it face constant dangers and threats?
to conclude, i want to tell you two stories about how mothers teach their children about the world even before they're born.
they're preparing themselves for the kind of world they will encounter on the other side of the womb.
the world they had learned about while in utero was not the same as the world into which they were born.
i like to think of it as a kind of technological magic.
and keep your eyes on the big screen.
without this ability there is no magic.
because the best stories always have a happy ending.
the tricks of magic have one special element.
they are stories with a twist.
the same thing happens when people watch magic tricks.
when i do a trick at a party -- that person will immediately pull their friend over and ask me to do it again.
they want to share the experience.
now experts believe that stories go beyond our capacity for keeping us entertained.
we all want to share our stories, whether it is the trick we saw at the party, the bad day at the office or the beautiful sunset we saw on vacation.
our stories make us the people we are and, sometimes, the people we want to be.
and if the story is a good one, it might even make us smile.
those of you who may remember me from tedglobal remember me asking a few questions which still preoccupy me.
let me give you one example of this.
you actually choose your lift music.
it was simply to encourage the inoculation of children by, not only making it a social event -- i think good use of behavioral economics in that, if you turn up with several other mothers to have your child inoculated, your sense of confidence is much greater than if you turn up alone.
so what happens in an institution is the very person who has the power to solve the problem also has a very, very large budget.
and once you have a very, very large budget, you actually look for expensive things to spend it on.
so i did come up with five suggestions, which they are actually actioning.
because the people who can actually solve them actually are too powerful and too preoccupied with something they think of as "strategy" to actually solve them.
the last thing in the world you ever want to see is your balance."
it wants the world to be the kind of place where the input and the change are proportionate.
but what i'm saying is we could just make things a little bit better for ourselves if we looked at it in this very simple four-way approach.
and the second thing, i think, is that the world needs to have people in charge of that.
it all became music to me.
when composers write music for me, i ask them to forget what they know about the cello.
so teachers and students all around the world are already using this.
i want to quickly say that although it does do it for 50 dollars, there are some limitations of this approach.
there is nothing bigger or older than the universe.
are we alone in the universe?
what is the future of the human race?
this meant they must have been closer together in the past.
but was there anything before the big bang?
we used to think that the theory of the universe could be divided into two parts.
we have made good progress on the first part, and now have the knowledge of the laws of evolution in all but the most extreme conditions.
i now turn to the second big question: are we alone, or is there other life in the universe?
we believe that life arose spontaneously on the earth, so it must be possible for life to appear on other suitable planets, of which there seem to be a large number in the galaxy.
if it was very low, one would have expected it to take most of the ten billion years available.
this brings me to the last of the big questions: the future of the human race.
if we are the only intelligent beings in the galaxy, we should make sure we survive and continue.
but we are entering an increasingly dangerous period of our history.
it will be difficult enough to avoid disaster in the next hundred years, let alone the next thousand or million.
the answers to these big questions show that we have made remarkable progress in the last hundred years.
but if we want to continue beyond the next hundred years, our future is in space.
all of my life i have sought to understand the universe and find answers to these questions.
what do you think of people in poverty?
the stories we tell about each other matter very much.
the stories we tell ourselves about our own lives matter.
i was six years old when i first heard stories about the poor.
now i didn't hear those stories from the poor themselves, i heard them from my sunday school teacher and jesus, kind of via my sunday school teacher.
this is what jesus asked of us.
i was very eager to be useful in the world -- i think we all have that feeling.
that was news to me, and it felt like it was a very important thing to get to participate in.
i imagined in my head, a kind of long line of individuals that were never going away, that would always be with us.
they were always going to ask me to help them and give them things, which i was excited to do, but i didn't know how it was going to work.
and i didn't know what would happen when i ran out of things to give, especially if the problem was never going away.
in the years following, the other stories i heard about the poor growing up were no more positive.
i heard about things that were going wrong in the lives of the poor.
i heard about disease, i heard about war -- they always seemed to be kind of related.
and i even felt a sense of shame because of that.
i stopped listening to their stories quite as closely as i had before.
and i stopped expecting things to really change.
now i still gave -- on the outside it looked like i was still quite involved.
i mean who can argue with that?
the truth be told, i was giving out of that place, not out of a genuine place of hope and excitement to help and of generosity.
i was purchasing something -- i was buying my right to go on with my day and not necessarily be bothered by this bad news.
so as i did this, and as i think many of us do this, we kind of buy our distance, we kind of buy our right to go on with our day.
i think that exchange can actually get in the way of the very thing that we want most.
it can get in the way of our desire to really be meaningful and useful in another person's life and, in short to love.
when i heard him speak, it was three years before that.
think of all the things you get at your bank and imagine those products and services tailored to the needs of someone living on a few dollars a day.
but more importantly, he told stories about the poor that were different than any stories i had heard before.
all they needed to do that more quickly and to do it better was a little bit of capital.
and i, in fact, was so deeply moved by this -- it's hard to express now how much that affected me -- but i was so moved that i actually quit my job a few weeks later, and i moved to east africa to try to see for myself what this was about.
for the first time, actually, in a long time i wanted to meet those individuals, i wanted to meet these entrepreneurs, and see for myself what their lives were actually about.
and in fact, through those interactions, for the first time, i was starting to get to be friends with some of those people in that big amorphous group out there that was supposed to be far away.
i was starting to be friends and get to know their personal stories.
and over and over again, as i interviewed them and spent my days with them, i did hear stories of life change and amazing little details of change.
so i would hear from goat herders who had used that money that they had received to buy a few more goats.
maybe they could afford a lock for the door and feel secure.
maybe it was just that they could put sugar in their tea and offer that to me when i came as their guest and that made them feel proud.
that was another thing that really touched me.
because the best way for people to change their lives is for them to have control and to do that in a way that they believe is best for them.
so i saw that and it was very humbling.
i never once was asked for a donation, which had kind of been my mode, right.
in fact, no one wanted me to feel bad for them at all.
if anything, they just wanted to be able to do more of what they were doing already and to build on their own capabilities.
so this idea that these new stories of business and hope might be shared with my friends and family, and through that, maybe we could get some of the money that they needed to be able to continue their businesses as loans, that's this little idea that turned into kiva.
we sent it over to uganda.
but instead a relationship that can promote respect and hope and this optimism that together we can move forward.
imagine how you feel; and then imagine the difference when you might see somebody who has a story of entrepreneurship and hard work who wants to tell you about their business.
imagine if you could hear a story you didn't expect of somebody who wakes up every day and works very, very hard to make their life better.
these stories can really change the way that we think about each other.
you see an opportunity and you decide what you're going to do to try to seize that.
when you lend them money, and they slowly pay you back over time, you have this excuse to have an ongoing dialogue.
and all over the world still need money to grow and to do more of what they want to do or they might need money during a hard month.
we make it really, really simple for me as well as anyone else who wants to use the site.
as investors choose to become involved based on those terms, they can either take their rewards back as cash, or they can decide in advance to give those returns away to a non-profit.
it's my hope that this kind of tool can show anybody who has an idea a path to go do what they want to do in the world and to gather the people around them that they already have, the people that know them best and that love them and want to support them, to gather them to make this happen.
but the good news is i don't think i need to stand here and convince you to care -- i'm not even going to try.
so what i think i can do today, that best thing i can give you -- i've given you my story, which is the best i can do.
and i think i can remind us that we do care.
i think we all already know that.
and i think we know that love is resilient enough for us to get out there and try.
and i believe more and more every time i listen in that that person's potential to do great things in the world and in my own potential to maybe help.
believing in each other, really being sure when push comes to shove that each one of us can do amazing things in the world, that is what can make our stories into love stories and our collective story into one that continually perpetuates hope and good things for all of us.
when's the last time you really enjoyed just the voice of your friend?
how beautiful it is to lose ourselves in these little streets on the island.
so what about something like that to rediscover our sense of adventure?
i have 18 minutes to tell you what happened over the past six million years.
we use that name to celebrate peace in the region and in the planet.
and the fact that it was the cover story of all these famous magazines gives you already an idea of her significance, i think.
i think knowing this is a very useful context within which we can think of our ancestry.
it took us only seven hours to do the first 470 kilometers of the 500, but took four, solid hours to do the last only 30 kilometers.
i was the first person to actually drive a car to the spot.
and once you make it there, the big question is where to start.
and you find nothing for years and years.
it was then, after such hard work and many frustrating years that we found selam, and you see the face here covered by sandstone.
how would you feel if you were me?
the feeling i had was a deep and quiet happiness and excitement, of course accompanied by a huge sense of responsibility, of making sure everything is safe.
and you see me worried and trying to protect my child, because you don't leave anyone with this kind of child, even a minister.
and how old was she when she died?
so when you measure those teeth, it was clear that she started out to be a girl with very small canine teeth.
and to know how old she was when she died, what you do is you do an informed estimate, and you say, how much time would be required to form this amount of teeth, and the answer was three.
what do we actually know about our ancestors?
we want to know how they looked like, how they behaved, how they walked around, and how they lived and grew up.
but that care means also you learn.
you spend more time with your parents.
but not everything was human, and i will give you a very exciting example.
so, i think the most important question at the end is, what do we actually learn from specimens like this and from our past in general?
i think it's important to promote in a more positive way on how we see ourselves.
and a lot of what goes on inside ...
but look at the patterns that they can do with their skin.
the best thing to do is to get as big as i can get."
today i'm going to take you on a voyage to some place so deep, so dark, so unexplored that we know less about it than we know about the dark side of the moon.
we are talking about the high seas.
we're going to voyage to some of these special places that we've been discovering in the past few years to show why we really need to care.
so here is a picture of the high seas as seen from above -- that area in the darker blue.
what i'd also like to convey is that it is not all doom and gloom that we are seeing in the high seas.
and how did we do that?
but we also spent many hours in the basements of the united nations, trying to work with governments to make them understand what was going on so far away from land that few of us had ever even imagined that these creatures existed.
it also provides a special habitat for these flying fish to lay their eggs.
so anything in the water is treated as if it's the high seas.
there's enough food there to last them the summer and the winter long.
that is, it provides a wonderful example of where you can go with a real regional initiative.
we need to work locally, but we also need to work ocean-basin-wide.
many already have transponders on board that allow us to find out where they are and even what they're doing.
but we need to think broad-scale.
we need to change how we actually go about managing these resources.
and third is that we need to look at ocean-basin-wide management.
so with that, i would just like to sincerely thank and honor sylvia earle for her wish, for it is helping us to put a face on the high seas and the deep seas beyond national jurisdiction.
so on this tour, i hope i provided you with a new perspective of the high seas: one, that it is our home too, and that we need to work together if we are to make this a sustainable ocean future for us all.
and it all started one day on a plane, on my way to ted, seven years ago.
and in the seat next to me was a high school student, a teenager, and she came from a really poor family.
and she wanted to make something of her life, and she asked me a simple little question.
so i get off the plane, and i come to ted.
so why don't i ask them what helped them succeed, and pass it on to kids?
and the first thing is passion.
but i have a lot of fun."
now a lot of kids tell me they want to be millionaires.
and i give lots of evidence.
the one thing that all of them have in common is that they're going to die.
so when you think about your parents or your grandparents, at best they may have created some photos or home videos, or a diary that lives in a box somewhere.
but what i think comes next is far more interesting.
you can imagine what something like this might look like five, 10 or 20 years from now as our technical capabilities improve.
now in closing, i think what we all need to be thinking about is if we want that to become our reality -- and if so, what it means for a definition of life and everything that comes after it.
and people do terrible things in wars.
so archie splits the men under his care as best he can into two equal groups.
i'm not even telling you the story because i think we should be running more carefully controlled randomized trials in all aspects of public policy, although i think that would also be completely awesome.
and he had a name for it.
he called it the god complex.
i see it in our business leaders.
well let me give you an example.
now you won't be able to understand a word of it, but this is what it looks like.
and what we learned is cesar's work is far too good to explain in the new york times magazine.
in about the length of this session, you would have counted all 5,000.
it would take you all day.
you could count them in five minutes.
this perhaps is why we find the god complex so tempting.
this baby was produced through trial and error.
you sell it at a supermarket.
it turns out to be very important.
now if you ascribe to the god complex, what you do is you find yourself a little god.
you try out all 10; you keep the one that works best.
you keep the one that works best.
we have no idea why it works, no idea at all.
i could give you all kinds of facts and figures about the u.s.
that is a huge failure rate.
now why are you just wandering around saying this obvious thing?"
stop giving them lists of questions every single one of which has an answer.
i have no idea how to do it.
there's this one trial he ran many years after world war ii.
they knew that their hospitals were the right place for patients, and they knew it was very unethical to run any kind of trial or experiment.
would you like to close down the trial now, or should we wait until we have robust results?"
and the reason he would do that kind of thing is because he understood it feels so much better to stand there and say, "here in my own little world, i am a god, i understand everything.
it feels so much more comfortable simply to lay down the law.
but it was always a conjecture.
taniyama tried and tried and tried and he could never prove that it was true.
he made a lot of mistakes.
but he made mistakes in a good direction.
i tried to emulate him, but i realized it is very difficult to make good mistakes."
and in fact, among all the diseases that existed in this land, it was the worst.
many children still died, but it was certainly better than what they had before.
and the beauty of the second cure for this disease was that it could be used on infants and one-year-olds.
and although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly, almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end.
and this went on for quite some time.
and the government was very upset.
we would lose all of our market."
and he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days, and seek out some more intelligent, open-minded people in a place called oxford, and come and try and tell the story at that place.
and then talk about why -- what is it that makes that true?
so in every car crash in which at least one person dies, they have information on all of the people.
so you can control for the basic things, like how hard the crash was, what seat the child was sitting in, etc., the age of the child.
and the other thing you might argue is, "well, car seats have got a lot better over time.
but what's interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much.
it really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents whose children died after they turned two, which has led to the passage of all these laws -- not very much on data.
and so i had some friends over to dinner, and i was asking -- we had a cookout -- i was asking them what advice they might have for me about proving my point.
and it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country, none of them wanted to do our crash test because they said, some explicitly, some not so explicitly, "all of our business comes from car seat manufacturers.
so i just wanted you to look at this.
and i think this gives you a good idea of why parents think car seats are so great.
look at the kid in the car seat.
it's hard to believe, when you look at this, that that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash.
so this is going to be a crash where they're going to slam this thing forward into a wall at 30 miles an hour, and see what happens.
bear in mind there are two things about this.
and also it turned out these bench seats are the very best way to install car seats.
having a flat back makes it much easier to install them.
and this crash would have been about a 450.
and this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat.
so that kid would do fine in the crash.
nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all.
but essentially, do something like this, which i don't know exactly how much it would cost to do, but there's no reason i could see why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat.
it seems to me that this can't be a very expensive solution, and it's got to work better than what we already have.
the answer both to why has a car seat been so successful, and why this may someday be adopted or not, lies in a story that my dad told me, relating to when he was a doctor in the u.s.
and this is a long time ago: you were allowed to do things then you can't do today.
ok, and most of them would not come back, but some of them would come back.
in this jar were huge horse pills.
they were almost impossible to swallow.
people would look at these and say, "man, this thing is so big and so hard to swallow.
because that would prove your case.)
and they use a completely different methodology that involves -- after the crash occurs, they get from the insurance companies the names of the people who were in the crash, and they call them on the phone, and they asked them what happened.
i wanted to give you a current picture of the economy.
but of course what we have to remember is this.
so what i'm going to try to do in the next 17 and a half minutes is i'm going to talk first about the flames -- where we are in the economy -- and then i'm going to take three trends that have taken place at ted over the last 25 years and that will take place in this conference and i will try and bring them together.
and i will try and give you a sense of what the ultimate reboot looks like.
and somehow it will all make sense.
and that, of course, is the reason why all of you are making such generous and wonderful donations to these nice folks.
let me show you what it looks like.
the only problem with this bill is it's not really worth very much.
and the reason we have to do that in the short term is because we have just run out of cash.
if you're 50 to 60 we want you to work two years more.
if you're under 50 we want you to work four more years.
but let me remind you this december it did snow in vegas.
here was one of the first things they built.
and when they stopped growing they would smell like bananas.
and you could tell very easily when your experiment was working and wasn't, and where it was in the phase.
they tried to engineer bacterias in such a way that they would act as your kidneys.
you give away all your teeth to the tooth fairy.
and we can do it with other things.
that meant that you can take the stuff right here, and turn it into almost anything in your body.
and this is about as close as you can get to a physical turing test.
and the same thing is happening in eyes.
this is a group in germany that's beginning to engineer eyes so that people who are blind can begin to see light and dark.
it is a natural state in everything that is alive, including hominids.
i think most of us are going to glance at it, and our grandchildren are going to begin to live it.
and i know that 10 years ago, if i had told you that this was all coming, you would have said that that's impossible.
the other thing that we know about it was that 10 years ago, as i looked at what even wired was talking about, we thought it was going to be tv, but better.
and if you take all these things that are impossible, i think one of the things that we're learning from this era, from this last decade, is that we have to get good at believing in the impossible, because we're unprepared for it.
and so i began to think about that.
and so i began thinking more about other kinds of dimensions, and i made a quick list.
so let me go through those three things.
first of all, we have all these things in our hands.
and so in some ways, all you really need is a cloudbook.
and everything will go through the web.
and i am suggesting that every bit will be owned by the web.
and so every thing will be part of the web.
the media wants to be liquid.
so those laws are going to kind of spread throughout all media.
now, the second thing that i want to talk about was this idea of restructuring, that what the web is doing is restructuring.
and what we're sharing were links, so you had to be kind of open with links.
each time you go into there, you have to tell it again who you are and all your friends are.
why should you be doing that?
you should just do that once, and it should know who all your friends are.
and you should have all the networks of all the relationships between those pieces of data.
we're kind of trying out what we want to call this thing.
and all these things that are going to be on this are not just pages, they are things.
and so we are in the middle of this thing that's completely linked, down to every object in the little sliver of a connection that it has.
so, the last thing i want to talk about is this idea that we're going to be codependent.
and i found out by looking at it that i search most at 11 o'clock in the morning.
that is going to be the price.
we are going to be the machine.
so the single idea that i wanted to leave with you is that we have to begin to think about this as not just "the web, only better," but a new kind of stage in this development.
but we can also think about it as kind of a large organism.
no bits will live outside the web.
these are big ideas cast in material form.
i kind of erased everything in my brain to follow that.
and to be an architect, somehow you have to negotiate between left and right, and you have to negotiate between this very private place where ideas take place and the outside world, and then make it understood.
and definitely my life has been part of that.
and those things are the reflection of the processes, and the time that they are made.
i have no interest in that whatsoever.
and i've had for 30 years an interest in a series of complexities where a series of forces are brought to bear, and to understand the nature of the final result of that, representing the building itself.
and then this led to broader ideas of buildings that come together through the multiplicity of systems.
it literally is connected to anything in terms of knowledge base.
and that turned right away into another project.
and as it moves, it takes pieces of the earth with it.
and an image which may be closest talks about the use of light as a medium, that light becomes literally a building material.
and we removed the air conditioning.
and when i saw this, first an image and then visited, it completely changed the way i thought after that point.
there it is modeled as it was developing into a piece of work.
and this is how they see the world.
we wanted it to stay green.
one enters the building as it lifts off the ground, and it becomes part of the idea.
the courts were made of that.
i was 17 and going on a peace walk.
and within a week i had come to believe that the second coming of christ had occurred, that it was sun myung moon, and that i had been specially chosen and prepared by god to be his disciple.
and they tried everything they could to get me out of there.
maybe some of you remember it.
and after about five long years my family had me deprogrammed.
and i then became a deprogrammer.
i started going out on cases.
and after about five years of doing this, i was arrested for kidnapping.
most of the cases i went out on were called involuntary.
what happened was that the family had to get their loved ones some safe place somehow.
and so they took them to some safe place.
and we would come in and talk to them, usually for about a week.
and so after this happened, i decided it was a good time to turn my back on this work.
and about 20 years went by.
there was a burning question though that would not leave me.
and toward the end of writing that book there was a documentary that came out.
these are the dead in jonestown.
women gave poison to their babies, and watched foam come from their mouths as they died.
the top picture is a group of moonies that have been blessed by their messiah.
i understand how this could happen.
god is going to fix all the problems in the world.
because god is going to stop war and hunger -- all these things i wanted to do -- all i have to do is humbly follow.
and the reason that gives me hope is that the first thing is to admit that we have a problem.
it happens in the human brain.
there is no evil force out there to get us.
and so the first step is to realize that we can do this together, and that there is no "us" and "them."
it changed the way our history developed.
so everyone of you turns to their neighbor please.
we carry in our face the proof that cooking, food transformation, made us what we are.
we talk about ourselves as omnivores.
we are the animals who eat cooked food.
i think the good news for me would be if we could go back and talk about the unleashing, the continuation of the unleashing of human potential.
but how did it actually run this show?
and this is actually taste reward and energy.
and something which maybe you don't like but you are so hungry that you really will be satisfied to eat.
this is what we are using."
but what it means to have a brain there is that, not only the big brain has to talk with the food, the food has to talk with the brain, because we have to learn actually how to talk to the brains.
this is the layer which actually touches the food you are swallowing and you digest, which is actually the lumen.
what it means is that we have a layered control system.
now both look -- and this is the blue arrows -- both look to the same food, which is in the lumen and in the area of your intestine.
the more usual case is overeating.
so now back to the cooking question and back to the design.
now what would be the language we have to talk to the gut brain that its signals are so strong that the big brain cannot ignore it?
you have on your left an olive oil droplet, and this olive oil droplet gets attacked by enzymes.
so, to make cooking really a very important element, i would say even philosophers have to change and have to finally recognize that cooking is what made us.
and it was also the beginning of our discontent, because if you wanted to distill all of our experience since the paleolithic, it would come down to two words: how and why.
and that is the fact that we are all brothers and sisters.
but what do i mean by different visions of life making for completely different possibilities for existence?
indeed, if you took all of the genius that allowed us to put a man on the moon and applied it to an understanding of the ocean, what you would get is polynesia.
we spend all of our lifetime trying to live to be 100 without losing our teeth.
the cause of suffering is ignorance.
and so, when this door opened onto the face of a woman who had not been out of that room in 55 years, you did not see a mad woman.
you saw a woman who was more clear than a pool of water in a mountain stream.
i spent 30 years living amongst the people of chinchero and i always heard about an event that i always wanted to participate in.
climb again over the course of 24 hours.
if you come to the south of the intiwatana, you find an altar.
and where does the river rise?
if those of you who are here remember that i mentioned that they remain ruled by a ritual priesthood, but the training for the priesthood is extraordinary.
so, literally two weeks ago, i returned from having spent six weeks with the elder brothers on what was clearly the most extraordinary trip of my life.
fields are planted in such an extraordinary way, that the one side of the field is planted like that by the women.
the other side is planted like that by the men.
and this is one of those initiates.
before we could begin our journey, we had to be cleansed at the portal of the earth.
and you see that the priest never wears shoes because holy feet -- there must be nothing between the feet and the earth for a mamo.
and this is actually the place where the great mother sent the spindle into the world that elevated the mountains and created the homeland that they call the heart of the world.
and so we ended up being taken aside into these huts, hidden away until the darkness.
and of course, this is a photograph literally taken the night we were in hiding, as they divine their route to take us out of the mountains.
they call themselves the elder brothers.
they dismiss the rest of us who have ruined the world as the younger brothers.
they cannot understand why it is that we do what we do to the earth.
the world remains a rich tapestry.
this does not have to happen.
i also want to tell you and share with you how my team and i have been using mushrooms over the last three years.
this is a material you all know is styrofoam, but i like to think of it as toxic white stuff.
even worse is when it finds its way into our natural environment -- on the side of the road or next to a river.
i fit into it, you fit into it, and a hundred years tops, my body can return to the earth with no preprocessing.
yet that packaging i got in the mail yesterday is going to last for thousands of years.
but nature provides us with a really good model here.
and this gets us back to the mushrooms.
so i'd like to share with you the four basic steps required to make these materials.
and i want to share with you a quick video from our facility that gives you a sense of how this looks at scale.
so i've said a number of times that we grow materials.
it actually takes a little longer.
the next is self-assembly, because the organism is actually doing most of the work in this process.
so you can have lots of small facilities spread all across the world.
and i think that can be some really good news.
and then one of two things will happen.
and you'll be left in peace to talk to the person you really want to talk to.
i was coming back to visit her.
and you count the number of times until the pattern head-tail-head appears and you average them.
so most people think b is true.
anything different about the two patterns?
that turns out to be important.
there are two ways of thinking about this.
we start tossing a coin, and we get a head -- and you start sitting on the edge of your seat because something great and wonderful, or awesome, might be about to happen.
it's the same for the first two parts of the sequence.
you're a little bit excited with the first head -- you get rather more excited with the next tail.
why do we care about that?
why do we want to do that?
because we understand very little about most human diseases.
and if we can get in at the bottom and understand the genetics, we'll have a window on the way the disease works, and a whole new way about thinking about disease therapies and preventative treatment and so on.
and i take one of you, or i take someone off the street, and i test them for the disease in question.
so a natural answer is 99 percent.
it actually depends on how common or how rare the disease is.
so now suppose we test them all.
but there are so many of them that there'll be an enormous number of false positives.
so even though we think the test is accurate, the important part of the story is there's another bit of information we need.
and the number we end up with -- that number which is a little bit less than one in 100 -- is to do with how likely one of those explanations is relative to the other.
each of them taken together is unlikely.
in the disease example, we had to bear in mind two things, one of which was the possibility that the test got it right or not.
and the other one was the chance, a priori, that the person had the disease or not.
there are two things involved -- two parts to the explanation.
and then if she were trying to kill the children, she succeeded.
i know how to do statistics."
so we need to understand where our competence is and isn't.
in the case of uncertainty, we get it wrong all the time -- and at the very least, we should be aware of that, and ideally, we might try and do something about it.
and one of the main causes of all these fires is electricity.
so we considered all of this.
and the power outlet needs to be smart enough to do it.
so here is what we did.
really when we think of our senses, or when we think of the loss of the sense, we really think about something more like this: the ability to touch something luxurious, to taste something delicious, to smell something fragrant, to see something beautiful.
this is what we want out of our senses.
really what we want to hear is music.
music is just one of the strangest things that there is.
now if you had to pick a sense to lose, i have to be very honest with you and say, we're better at restoring hearing than we are at restoring any sense that there is.
i'd just be plainly heartbroken, because i know that music would never sound the same to me.
now hearing loss and the treatment for hearing loss has really evolved in the past 200 years.
and that was the best you could do for hearing loss.
this is her 10 years later.
do you remember writing that chapter?
and so when it comes to this idea of restoring beauty to somebody's life, we have a long way to go when it comes to audition.
now there are a lot of reasons for that.
in fact, the whole reason we use it is because it has semantic-specificity.
there's really very little point in listening to music when it doesn't sound good to you.
the acoustics of music are much harder than those of language.
if you can hear music, you should be able to hear anything.
now if we could just play this.
go ahead and play this one.
now my goal in showing you that is to show you that music is not robust to degradation.
and it might be that you kind of like that.
and you're not hearing the same thing that most people who have normal hearing are hearing.
now the next question is, well how does it really sound?
i'm going to play you two clips of usher, one which is normal and one which has almost no high frequencies, almost no low frequencies and not even that many mid frequencies.
again, we are very, very far away in just getting to where we want to get to.
and it turns out that his temporal bones were harvested when he died to try to look at the cause of his deafness, which is why he has molding clay and his skull is bulging out on the side there.
now i want to show you one last video.
and this is of a student of mine named joseph who i had the good fortune to work with for three years in my lab.
and not long after i got my cochlear implant, i started learning how to play piano.
and the fact that he can play the piano like that is a testament to his brain.
truth of the matter is you can play the piano without a cochlear implant, because all you have to do is press the keys at the right time.
and so there is certainly a lot of hope, but there's a lot more that needs to be done.
and we have a much longer way to go when it comes to the idea of restoring perfect hearing.
and let me tell you right now, it's fine that we would all be very happy with speech.
but i tell you, if we lost our hearing, if anyone here suddenly lost your hearing, you would want perfect hearing back.
and i don't think that we should give up on beauty.
and i want to thank you for your time.
and so this idea has a lot of traction with us.
so now, the thing is that this is a different kind of spell.
the important thing is we can write it in a high-level language.
and my first question doing this -- or one of my questions doing this -- was how can you make an arbitrary shape or pattern out of dna?
and then what happens is, you heat this whole thing up to about boiling.
we do this for real in the test tube.
you can look with a microscope and see them on a surface.
and the neat thing is that if you change the sequence and change the spell, you just change the sequence of the staples.
what we really want to do in the end is learn how to program self-assembly so that we can build anything, right?
we want to be able to build technological artifacts that are maybe good for the world.
you are the reason why i said yes to the invitation to come here today.
and you all have chosen your own instruments to fulfill this mission of creating a better world.
others chose dancing or painting or making music like we just heard.
let us stop for a moment and feel this uneasiness.
let us cherish the fact that probably most of you have never been close to a gun.
in many countries it is a different story.
weapons can do a lot of harm.
they are the cause of much distress.
why then am i standing before you with this weapon?
today i want to tell you why.
today i want to tell you why i chose the gun to create a better world.
and i want to tell you how this gun can help.
my story starts in the city of nijmegen in the east of the netherlands, the city where i was born.
my father was a hardworking baker, but when he had finished work in the bakery, he often told me and my brother stories.
and most of the time, he told me this story i'm going to share with you now.
the story of what happened when he was a conscripted soldier in the dutch armed forces at the beginning of the second world war.
they meant to rule by means of repression.
my father was there to provide it.
as the son of a farmer who knew how to hunt, my father was an excellent marksman.
my father had been given an old gun that could not even reach the opposite riverbank.
so this story stayed with me.
then in high school, i was gripped by the stories of the allied soldiers -- soldiers who left the safety of their own homes and risked their lives to liberate a country and a people that they didn't know.
it was then that i decided i would take up the gun -- out of respect and gratitude for those men and women who came to liberate us -- from the awareness that sometimes only the gun can stand between good and evil.
and that is why i took up the gun -- not to shoot, not to kill, not to destroy, but to stop those who would do evil, to protect the vulnerable, to defend democratic values, to stand up for the freedom we have to talk here today in amsterdam about how we can make the world a better place.
ladies and gentlemen, i do not stand here today to tell you about the glory of weapons.
i stand here today to tell you about the use of the gun as an instrument of peace and stability.
the gun may be one of the most important instruments of peace and stability that we have in this world.
well we were talking on the human mind this morning.
and when there is mutual gain, both sides stand to lose more than they would gain if they started a war.
we do this in a legitimized way only after our democracy has asked us to do so.
that is why we are trying to build a judicial system right now in afghanistan.
and i hope that one day armies can be disbanded and humans will find a way of living together without violence and oppression.
but until that day comes, we will have to make ideals and human failure meet somewhere in the middle.
i stand for my men and women who are prepared to risk their lives for a less violent world for all of us.
ladies and gentlemen, until the day comes when we can do away with the gun, i hope we all agree that peace and stability do not come free of charge.
i hope you will support the efforts of our armed forces to train soldiers like this young captain and provide her with a good gun, instead of the bad gun my father was given.
i hope you will support our soldiers when they are out there, when they come home and when they are injured and need our care.
i hope you will respect my soldiers, this soldier with this gun.
because she wants a better world.
most regions of the world are moving in that direction.
i realized that my technologies had to make sense when i finished a project.
i've got a group of 10 people that work with me to gather data on key measures of technology in many different areas, and we build models.
most of the project was done in the last few years of the project.
but you see a very clear trend.
but what we're actually seeing is that we actually more than keep up with it.
this is based on the number of hosts.
these things have already been done in animals.
where will we get the software?
it turns out that we can understand it.
we've already had very good models and simulation of about 15 regions out of the several hundred.
it would be able to translate from one language to another.
you can go there with other people, have any kind of experience with anyone involving all of the senses.
so we have to have the will to apply them to the right problems.
the most friction you have is when you first put your hand or your foot on the rock.
you get to the last pitch.
you have to plan ahead to get to the top.
but you also can't forget that each individual move you have to be able to complete.
and they follow the most obvious solution.
women are much more in balance because they don't have that idea that they're going to be able to do 100 pull-ups.
they think about how to get the weight over their feet because it's sort of natural -- they carry you all day long.
and of course there is rule number nine.
i came up with rule number nine after i actually didn't plan for a fall, and went about 40 feet and cracked a rib.
once you get to that point where you know it's going to happen, you need to start thinking about how you're going to let go because that is the critical piece of not getting hurt -- how you're going to fall onto the rope, or if you're climbing without a rope, fall to a place where you can actually control the fall.
he explains what they are, and how they get us into trouble.
so what i want to talk about today is belief.
and whatever they were doing just before they got the reward, they repeat that particular pattern.
is it a dangerous predator, or is it just the wind?
your next decision could be the most important one of your life.
this is the only equation in the talk by the way.
and is it really a horse?
or is it more like a frog?
and what do you see here?
so when i go back without the prime, your brain already has the model so you can see it again.
just shout out anything you see.
so their superstitions, their patternicities, are all associated with feelings of lack of control and so forth.
what do you see in this particular one here, in this field?
here is what you show subjects.
you think people are talking about you.
and we then call that schizophrenia.
and of course you all know exactly what this is, right?
and what pattern do you see here?
and then we have to flip the image for you to see that it's a set up.
and he was kind enough to post this and give us the reveal.
this is a fairly new one that throws us off because of the conflicting patterns of comparing this angle with that angle.
and then you notice something quite a little bit odd about the eyes and the mouth.
is it just the wind or a dangerous predator?
they think it was an inside job by the bush administration.
would you have any problem kissing our models to test it?
so this is a blind test.
and 30 years later i was sitting in an airplane, next to a lady called veronica, who came from chile, and we were on a human rights tour, and she was starting to tell me what it was like to be tortured, and, from my very privileged position, this was the only reference point that i had.
but the thing that really amazed me, that i had no idea, was that you could suffer in this way and then have your whole experience, your story, denied, buried and forgotten.
we stay because of the fear that what pushed us into the camp ...
man: the soldiers with clubs this long beat us to get a confession.
they ran to join the others ... leaving me for dead.
and as the story of mr.
anyway, witness has been trying to arm the brave people who often put their lives at risk around the world, with cameras, and i'd like to show you just a little more of that.
you can say a person is lying.
all the video you have just seen was recorded by human rights groups working with witness.
so i think it's safe to say i know a little bit about the process of pitching.
so the most important thing is integrity.
and then you have to have the skills that it takes to get a company going.
there are very few people who have the full set of skills that it takes to run a company.
so what else do you require?
i want to know that you have commitment.
that you are going to be here to the end.
you're going to keep my money alive and you're going to make more money out of it.
so i want to know that you're committed to be there to the very end.
you've got to be able to see where this is going.
because i need to know that you know that while changing the world is great, it doesn't always happen.
and before you get to change the world, bad things are going to take place.
so i need to know that you have the ability to listen.
people who are vcs or angels investing in you have had experience and they'd like to know that you want to hear that experience.
okay, so how do you convey all these 10 things in 10 minutes without saying any more?
and it goes from beginning to end.
you want to be able to get them to such an emotional high that they are ready to write you a check, throw money at you, right there before you leave.
start with telling them what the market is.
you've also got to let me know that there are touchstones.
you want to tie in to the rest of the world out there.
so this all feeds in together.
all right, so the best way to do this stuff is to look at our betters, look at people who have done this before.
who do you think we should look at as our role model?
and why this whole thing makes sense.
and then i come back to you.
and then you want to give me a quick business overview.
that lets me know the context.
why is this market worth getting at over here?
do a canned demo, or do something that lets me know why people are going to buy whatever it is.
and i want to know if you have any relationships that are going to be special to help you.
this helps to say you're bigger than just one little thing over here.
even if the competition is the old way of doing something.
i want to know exactly what your competition is, and then that will help me judge how you fit into the whole operation over here.
and i want to know three or four or five years forward.
and so that gives me the whole picture for the next several years into which i'm investing.
and i want to know how the money you're going to get from me is going to help you get there.
this is where you tell me how much you actually want to get.
and then you take me back to your logo.
now i come back to you.
have you seen me touch the computer?
you want to have a handout that gives a lot more information, because the handout has to stand without you over here.
and that makes me really sad because i'm sick and tired of things not working.
where do we rank three weeks ago in another report by the oecd?
so i think it should be really, really clear that our system is broken.
in case some of you forgot what play is, this is what play looks like.
i have been told by babas and dyados that we shouldn't let our kids play so much because life is serious and we need to train them for the seriousness of life.
but then what happens in step three?
i want to go back to work because i need to further my career or i just want to go have coffees.
true story: i went looking for a school for my kid.
we went to this prestigious little school and they say they're going to study math 10 times a week and science eight times a week and reading five times a day and all this stuff.
and i will prove it to you in the next part of the speech -- that play is the catalyst, it is the revolution, that we can use to transform bulgaria for the better.
but what you may not know is that bears that play more survive longer.
these are the benefits to play.
little exercise just for a second: close your eyes and try to imagine a world without play.
what does this world look like?
they buy more of your service and they tell more of their friends, which leads to more profit.
why do i care if you get in at nine o'clock?
if you don't believe me, well just go home and think about it some more or something.
you're the ones that have to go back to the office or talk to your friends and ignite the fire of change in the play revolution.
fear is the enemy of play.
let them be on the internet.
let them have fun at the workplace.
today is the start of the uprising.
but what you need to do is fan the flames of the revolution.
i had a fire nine days ago.
i always live in the present -- i love the present.
so i understand that this meeting was planned, and the slogan was from was to still.
i still have -- or did i use the word still?
i am doing my work like i always did.
so this takes care of my age.
i want to show you my work so you know what i am doing and why i am here.
all of these things were made during the last 75 years.
i have so much to say.
i have to think what i am going to say.
let me tell you some about my life.
as i said, i started to do these things 75 years ago.
my work actually took me through many countries, and showed me a great part of the world.
this is not that they took me -- the work didn't take me -- i made the things particularly because i wanted to use them to see the world.
i was incredibly curious to see the world, and i made all these things, which then finally did take me to see many countries and many cultures.
we mashed the clay with our feet when it came from the hillside.
and then finally it was prepared for the throwing.
and there i really worked as an apprentice.
i also got at the time a workbook which explained my rights and my working conditions, and i still have that workbook.
my mother thought that this was not very proper, so she sat with us to add propriety to this activity.
and i visited it with several ladies, and asked all sorts of questions of the director.
i remember that it was quite successful.
so as a journeyman, i put an ad into the paper that i had studied, that i was a down-to-earth potter's journeyman and i was looking for a job as a journeyman.
the first day i came to work in this shop there was on my wheel a surprise for me.
and actually, my work took me to many countries because i used my work to fill my curiosity.
i was finally there, although i had nothing to do -- i was a foreign expert.
this was a very dangerous accusation.
and if this is the end of my five minutes, i want to tell you that i actually did survive, which was a surprise.
rufus griscom: now i think of our story as starting a few years earlier.
rg: we were at the time running a very different kind of website.
so like we said, the early years were really wonderful, but they were also really difficult.
and we feel like some of that difficulty was because of this false advertisement around parenting.
and we went into parenting expecting our lives to look like this.
we really felt like what we went in expecting had nothing to do with what we were actually experiencing, and so we decided we really wanted to give it to parents straight.
we really wanted to let them understand what the realities of parenting were in an honest way.
and of course, there are many more than four things you can't say about parenting, but we would like to share with you today four that are particularly relevant for us personally.
we were in the process of giving birth to our first child.
and i was there with my arms open.
this picture is from literally a few seconds after the baby was placed in my hands and i brought him over.
and this was all quite remarkable.
but what i felt towards the child at that moment was deep affection, but nothing like what i feel for him now, five years later.
and i think the reality is that love is a process, and i think the problem with thinking of love as something that's binary is that it causes us to be unduly concerned that love is fraudulent, or inadequate, or what have you.
but i think a lot of men do go through this sense in the early months, maybe their first year, that their emotional response is inadequate in some fashion.
but i am going to give him three seconds.
i felt like i was a vessel of the future of humanity.
that continued into the the hospital.
we thought we actually could go through this again and thought we knew what we would be up against.
and we were grateful that i was able to get pregnant, and i soon learned that we were having a boy, and then when i was five months, we learned that we had lost our child.
this is actually the last little image we have of him.
as i was working through that mourning process, i was amazed that i didn't want to see anybody.
i really wanted to crawl into a hole, and i didn't really know how i was going to work my way back into my surrounding community.
so it was a very difficult time.
as i started working through it more, i started climbing out of that hole and talking with other people.
i was really amazed by all the stories that started flooding in.
and i just remember feeling all these stories came out of the woodwork, and i felt like i happened upon this secret society of women that i now was a part of, which was reassuring and also really concerning.
so we really wanted to take a deeper look at it in hopes that we would find a silver lining.
but you realize you resubmit yourself to losing control in a really wonderful way, which we think provides a lot of meaning to our lives and is quite gratifying.
so where does that leave the two of us as a family with our three little boys in the thick of all this?
can we move that up a little bit?
and we go to live concerts, and we get that as much as we can.
and this just didn't work until we could cross this line that says high-definition.
he died 25 years ago this year, and was born 75 years ago this year.
so let me tell you a little bit how this was done.
first of all, let me get you to the end step.
and in the right speaker is going to be the original recording, and the left speaker is going to be the new recording, actually of an instrument just like that one, and i'm going to play them together at the same time.
and this is kind of another example of putting a science behind natural behavior.
and then you heard the original.
and the experience is: i want to be in the room and hear the musicians.
lots of you can afford to buy one of these.
what you heard today was not perfect.
i get it -- it was all just laid in for me yesterday there.
and i believe this is coming.
you want to hear it played by different musicians.
you want to hear it in different rooms and whatever.
and i want you to hear that right now.
what i'm going to try and do is to give some pointers to what i think is the landscape on the other side of the crisis, what things we should be looking out for and how we can actually use the crisis.
and i want to talk about how we ensure that this crisis, which is by no means small, really is used to the full.
i want to start just by saying a bit about where i'm coming from.
but what i want to talk about begins when i was at this city, this university, as a student.
and i spent quite a lot of time with them rather than in punts.
and although that was great for the music business at the time, it wasn't much good for anything else.
if you look at america, the proportion of americans with no one to talk to about important things went up from a tenth to a quarter.
we're now at another moment when another wave of teenagers are entering a cruel job market.
there will be a million unemployed young people here by the end of the year, thousands losing their jobs everyday in america.
and i think one of the lessons of history is that even the deepest crises can be moments of opportunity.
you can see it in daily life.
but i think last year when governments did step in, people were quite glad that they were there, that they did act.
you can see a bit of the same thing happening in the business world.
some, i think some of the bankers who have appear to have learned nothing and forgotten nothing.
we know we can't go back to where we were before the crisis.
he believed if you see a problem, you shouldn't tell someone to act, you should act on it yourself, and he lived long enough and saw enough of his ideas first scorned and then succeed that he said you should always take no as a question and not as an answer.
some of the ideas are strange.
people come together to sing about the things that really bug them.
now, i want to end by saying a little bit about what i think this means for capitalism.
because of the depth of the crisis, i think we are at a moment of choice.
but this is one of those very rare moments when we have to choose whether we're just pedaling furiously to get back to where we were a year or two ago, and a very narrow idea of what the economy is for, or whether this is a moment to jump ahead, to reboot and to do some of the things we probably should have been doing anyway.
now that we see these huge differences in savings rates, how is it possible that language might have something to do with these differences?
let me tell you a little bit about how languages fundamentally differ.
and something i realized quite early on was that the chinese language forced me to speak about and -- in fact, more fundamentally than that -- ever so slightly forced me to think about family in very different ways.
let me give you an example.
suppose i were talking with you and i was introducing you to my uncle.
you understood exactly what i just said in english.
my language would force me to tell you whether or not this was an uncle on my mother's side or my father's side, whether this was an uncle by marriage or by birth, and if this man was my father's brother, whether he was older than or younger than my father.
what you may not have realized is that english is actually an outlier.
if that's true and it makes the future feel like something more distant and more different from the present, that's going to make it harder to save.
but how would you actually go about testing such a theory?
let me show you how far you can do that.
one way to imagine that is i gather large datasets from around the world.
do you happen to know how much your house is worth?
if you do, would you mind if i timed how long it took you to walk down that hallway?
it turns out there are six different ways to be married in europe.
now how can we think about health behaviors to think about savings?
i could go on and on with the list of differences that you can find.
i get that all the time in dubai.
i have been living and teaching in the gulf for over 30 years.
and in that time, i have seen a lot of changes.
and i want to talk to you today about language loss and the globalization of english.
i want to tell you about my friend who was teaching english to adults in abu dhabi.
and one fine day, she decided to take them into the garden to teach them some nature vocabulary.
how did those students get all that knowledge?
it's not necessary to tell you how important it is to be able to communicate across generations.
a language dies every 14 days.
but i do know that i've seen a lot of changes.
when i first came out to the gulf, i came to kuwait in the days when it was still a hardship post.
that is a little bit too early.
now can it be right to reject a student on linguistic ability alone?
would he need the same language as a lawyer, for example?
we put a stop sign, and we stop them in their tracks.
and you have to satisfy us first that your english is good enough.
now it can be dangerous to give too much power to a narrow segment of society.
we need one today more than ever.
but i am against using it as a barrier.
do we really want to end up with 600 languages and the main one being english, or chinese?
where do we draw the line?
there are lots and lots of tests of english.
they want to give their children the best chance in life.
and she was the best in the class at those subjects.
which tells us that when students come to us from abroad, we may not be giving them enough credit for what they know, and they know it in their own language.
and now the children in his village get the same grades at school as the children who have electricity at home.
let us not keep them and ourselves in the dark.
use it to spread great ideas.
i am known best for human-powered flight, but that was just one thing that got me going in the sort of things that i'm working in now.
while this was all going on, i was in the field of weather modification, although getting a ph.d.
he needed them -- he needed the money for starting a company.
and there was only about 30 to help retire the debt.
and he thought it would take another 18 years for somebody to win that.
but that sure started me thinking about various things, and immediately, we began making a solar-powered plane because we felt solar power was going to be so important for the country and the world, we didn't want the small funding in the government to be decreased, which is what the government was trying to do with it.
and this is the weight of all air and land vertebrates.
you don't need to dig down for these chemicals, and we can do things much more efficiently.
paul maccready: the wings could touch together on top and not break.
this shows the other end of the spectrum.
tm: and i can control it by putting the lift on one side of the wing, or on the other.
how old were you when you invented that?
as the wind comes up, it has to go over the cliff, so as you walk through the air, it goes around your body, some has to go over you.
and then also, like it said in the video, you can turn it left or right just by putting the lift under one wing or another.
i was going to bring an airplane, but i was worried about hitting people in here, so i thought this would be a little bit more gentle.
and out of that, you get the need for the kind of things that jimmy was talking about, which is our new kinds of organization, or a better way to put it: how do we organize ourselves without organizations?
the whole history of telephony is a story of dealing with that uncertainty.
more and more, the inventors of things will not be able to say that in advance.
we like to think that invention is a sort of moment of creation: there is a moment of birth when someone comes up with an idea.
let me just give you two examples.
they want to be part of that flow of information.
what kind of changes do we need in public policy and funding to make that possible?
what should be the role of public policy?
let me just give you one final example of what that means.
and i was having dinner with this guy called timothy chan.
it helps him when he is overwhelmed with grief and despair.
so he went on this retreat.
and he became interested in that.
and he showed him a dish full of needles.
he went back to his cave.
and after 12 years there is still no vision.
and he won't even look left or right to see any encouraging vision.
and he comes to the town.
and he sits down looking at the dog.
well, at least i can clean this wound and wash it."
and he took a shard of something, and cut a piece of flesh from his thigh, and he placed it on ground.
he was not really thinking too carefully about the aspca.
he was just immediately caught with the situation.
so he starts to do that.
and then i thought i would share with you what that method is, or one of them.
the animals are in one of their human lives.
they could all be just fine.
but they are nice to somebody.
but all of you in a way are part of the eternal mother.
and then the next thing we do is what is called "mother recognition."
and we see the mother in every being.
we see that look that the mother has on her face, looking at this child that is a miracle that she has produced from her own body, being a mammal, where she has true compassion, truly is the other, and identifies completely.
often the life of that other will be more important to her than her own life.
he has his little ears and he smiles and he rocks you in his arms.
and this is the way you do it.
and you do that for a while, until you really feel that.
then you move from there to remembering the kindness of mothers in general, if you can remember the kindness of your own mother, if you can remember the kindness of your spouse, or, if you are a mother yourself, how you were with your children.
you want to repay that kindness that all beings have shown to you.
in each one of these you can take some weeks, or months, or days depending on how you do it, or you can do them in a run, this meditation.
and then you think of how lovely beings are when they are happy, when they are satisfied.
and every being looks beautiful when they are internally feeling a happiness.
and you feel a love toward them and you want them to be happy, even the enemy.
if you love your enemy that means you want your enemy to be happy.
if your enemy was really happy, why would they bother to be your enemy?
so it makes sense to want your enemy to be happy, because they'll stop being your enemy because that's too much trouble.
and that is where you then look at the reality of all the beings you can think of.
and you look at them, and you see how they are.
and they think of it as somehow macho, hard discipline on themselves.
but actually they are cruel to themselves.
and the more they succeed and the more power they have, the more unhappy they are.
and you then feel you must act.
you might be in fear of something.
some bad guy is making himself more and more unhappy being more and more mean to other people and getting punished in the future for it in various ways.
in the great teaching of his holiness the dalai lama that he always teaches everywhere, he says that that is the common religion of humanity: kindness.
and that means whatever happens to other beings is happening to us: we are responsible for that, and we should take it and do whatever we can at whatever little level and small level that we can do it.
there is no way not to do it.
although, the change in your mind already does something for other beings: they can sense this new quality in yourself, and it helps them already, and gives them an example.
and what i'm going to do is share with you my ignorance on this subject.
i want you to read this, because we're going to come back to it in a moment.
but i know it when i see it."
and the two here are just examples.
and you then ask the question: why is the water hot?
the point is that you get into trouble when you ask a single question with a single box for an answer, in which that single question actually is many questions with quite different meanings, but with the same words.
i think falls in that category.
what is the state of science?
so what one is interested in has a lot to do with the rewards of the system.
one of the things i want to do is to help you with a very important task -- which you may not know that you have very often -- which is to understand how to sit next to a physicist at a dinner party and have a conversation.
you learn everything you can about that.
and then there's another kind of thing that you might study, and you study that hard.
but then, if you know everything you can know about those two things, and you put them together, what can you say about this combination?
and i want to introduce a word that i think is very useful, which is stacking.
and if you look at the list of things on the bottom, we are familiar with the arabic numbers one to 10 and so on.
and think of things in your life that are binary, one of them is light switches.
they can be on and off.
and you put lots of them together and you come with something called integrated circuits.
and from that comes the internet.
the two blobs that are light in the middle there are the united states and europe.
so here we have what i think is one of the great ideas, which is google.
you carve them in blocks and then you pile them on top of one another, and they support weight.
what that means is that you have to have a high performance or value for cost.
but if you have something that has a function, and it's really cheap, people will find new ways of putting it together to make new things.
now, the example is something that i want to give you from the work that we ourselves do.
we are very interested in delivering health care in the developing world, and one of the things that we wish to do in this particular business is to find a way of doing medical diagnosis at as close to zero cost as we can manage.
and i don't want to spend your time in going through the details, but in the lower right-hand corner, you see an example of the kind of thing that we have.
and, since the health care worker of much of this part of the world is an 18 year-old with an ak-47, who happens to be out of work and is willing to go around and do this sort of thing, he can take a picture of it with his cellphone, send the picture back to where there is a doctor, and the doctor can look at it.
if we can pull this off, if we can build more function, it will be stackable.
part of my interest in this, i have to say, is that i would like to -- how do i put this politely?
one of them is from mr.
and i think that's a very good way of thinking about the problem.
you have to have low cost, but you also have to have a function.
and that certainly is going in the right direction.
if we make that kind of simplicity in our technology and then give it to you guys, you can go off and do all kinds of fabulous things with it.
how do i put that simply?
and the way that i've been doing it has been multifaceted.
and what happened was i was sent this piece of audio and had no idea who generated the audio.
and this is what came to me.
recording: hi, my name is ray, and on yesterday my daughter called me because she was stressed out because of things that were going on on her job that she felt was quite unfair.
being quite disturbed, she called for comfort, and i didn't really know what to tell her, because we have to deal with so much mess in our society.
so i was led to write this song just for her, just to give her some encouragement while dealing with stress and pressures on her job.
and let it give you some strength to get the next few moments on your job.
so i was so moved by this -- this is incredible.
so the first thing i thought of is we have to thank him.
and have to do something with it."
i heard you were looking for me."
and it makes me think of this.
but the truth is life is being lived there.
this is kind of like something i used to do in third grade.
and i promise you, if you take that walk inside google streetview, you come to a moment where something comes back and hits you in the face.
he slept over at my house once, and he left his pillow.
he died long after he left the pillow at my house, but we never got around to returning it."
but sometimes i feel really lonely.
and when i feel that way even the smallest act of kindness can make me cry.
you can look at it online.
and so some really nice things came together.
some came from the party who had just lost.
and i asked people to send me beautiful things made out of the angrigami.
so one of them was fairly straightforward.
a guy said that his daughter got scared at night and could i write a song for her, his daughter.
so the nice thing was is he walked by his daughter's room at some point, and she actually was singing that song to herself.
and then i got this email.
and there's a little bit of a back story to this.
but the idea was that at one point i did a project called facebook me equals you, where i wanted to experience what it was like to live as another person.
and i got a lot, like 30 in a half an hour.
and i chose two people to be, and i asked them to send me descriptions of how to act as them on facebook.
and the person who didn't, it turned out, had just moved to a new city and taken on a new job.
and i felt badly for not having done a good job.
so she had seen the "scared" song and wondered if i could do something.
and she wrote a sort of descriptive set of what it felt like to have had this anxiety.
and so what i decided to do.
and so quietly in the background, i started sending people this.
and this is the kind of thing that i got back.
i just want to say thanks for even considering it."
and then a few days later i sent her this.
and so this would be the typical talk i would give.
they also gave me normal people and everything.
and what came up was a number of pieces of data.
and how you end up with a psychopath, and a killer, depends on exactly when the damage occurs.
you get different kinds of psychopaths.
so there is the pattern that every one of them had, but they all were a little different too.
and so in this way you can only get it from your mother.
and it does have some consequences.
and what i think might happen in these areas of the world, where we have constant violence, you end up having generations of kids that are seeing all this violence.
and now the boys and the girls get them.
so i think after several generations, and here is the idea, we really have a tinderbox.
and you're talking as if you come from a normal family."
she then told me about our own family tree.
but the bad news is that your cousin is also lizzie borden.
and the first murder of a mother by a son was my great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.
and that book is very interesting.
and we had to take action.
and they all seemed to be ok.
but our grandkids are going to be kind of concerned here.
and now they are close as can be.
this is a picture about a year ago.
so it's in that same sense that we look back in time to understand what the universe is made of.
you could stick it on the front of a t-shirt, which is always the sign of elegance.
can anyone see what it is?
well, we had a long time to come up with good analogies.
and back in the 1980s, when we wanted the money for the lhc from the u.k.
and we came up with this analogy, and it seemed to work.
it's almost as if there was one beautiful kind of super-force, back at the beginning of time.
and if i was to put money on it, i would put money on -- in a very unscientific way -- that that these things would also crop up at the lhc.
then light began to travel through the universe.
when i was a child, i always wanted to be a superhero.
i wanted to save the world and then make everyone happy.
when i first saw his picture, i thought that these superpowers came from his super collar.
but now i know it was all in his smile.
and even blind babies smile to the sound of the human voice.
how many people here in this room smile more than 20 times per day?
raise your hand if you do.
so what ubuntu really says is that there is no way for us to be human without other people.
so she took me along to translate.
it was my mother with five little children.
at every single refugee camp, she has to face off soldiers who want to take my elder brother mark, who was nine, and make him a boy soldier.
and they would sing them only when they planted the rice, as though they were seeding the hearts of the dead into the rice.
but when it came for harvest time, they would sing these joyful songs, that were made up of the names of every child who had been born that year.
and then the next planting season, when they sang the dirge, they would remove as many names of the dead that equaled as many people that were born.
and i was supposed to do this alone.
i cried for a very long time.
he just sat there watching me cry for an hour.
just know that it is enough sometimes to know that it is difficult."
take anything you want out of the suitcase.
there were some really bad people there.
and when he got tired of reading them, he started to teach the men in death row how to read, with these comic books.
the igbo used to say that they built their own gods.
they would come together as a community, and they would express a wish.
and their wish would then be brought to a priest, who would find a ritual object, and the appropriate sacrifices would be made, and the shrine would be built for the god.
all it requires is to recognize among us, every day -- the few of us that can see -- are surrounded by people like the ones i've told you.
there are some of you in this room, amazing people, who offer all of us the mirror to our own humanity.
i imagine an old man crying here, out of the sight of the overseer.
he pushes his tongue through a hole where his tooth would be, if he were whole.
i call a name that could be his.
they weigh thousands of pounds, are not by any means agile.
so this weighs a little more than a tenth of a pound.
the smaller you make it the more quickly you can turn.
so this should be clear in these videos.
so we use a little trick.
and it does that avoiding obstacles.
so it has to do this because this gap in the window is only slightly larger than the width of the robot.
so it knows how to combine little bits and pieces of trajectories to do these fairly difficult tasks.
and so here we looked to nature.
so this is actually a piece of fig.
so this also has to be done in a decentralized way.
so this is what we call anonymity.
so what i want to show you next is a video of 20 of these little robots flying in formation.
so once you know how to fly in formation, you can actually pick up objects cooperatively.
so what happens when you leave your lab and you go outside into the real world?
so suppose i were to send this into a building and i had no idea what this building looked like, i can ask this robot to go in, create a map and then come back and tell me what the building looks like.
so essentially it knows where to go to look for places that have the least information.
so i want to leave you with one last application.
robots like this can really change the way we do k through 12 education.
so before i play this video, i want to tell you that they created it in the last three days after getting a call from chris.
but i do want to talk to you about something that i think is dear to all of us.
and i think few of us spend the day without eating bread in some form.
i have two loaves of bread here.
i want to see a show of hands.
and i think it is because we feel that this kind of bread really is about authenticity.
why do we have this image?
why do we feel that this is more true than this?
well i think it has a lot to do with our history.
and we have this mythical image of how life was in rural areas in the past.
and it means that you now eat products, which can come from all around the world.
now you may prefer this loaf of bread.
excuse my hands but this is how it is.
but it has changed the world.
this tiny bread that is tasteless in some ways and has a lot of problems has changed the world.
well the best way to look at that is to do a tiny bit of simplistic statistics.
that means that we have now more food available than ever before in human history.
what happened to our bread in the meantime?
and it frees us all up to do other things -- to sit at ted meetings and not to worry about our food.
never before has the responsibility to feed the world been in the hands of so few people.
and never before have so many people been oblivious of that fact.
we add in raisins and oil and milk and all kinds of things to make bread, from a simple food into kind of a support for calories.
wheat is the most important crop -- the first crop we domesticated and the most important crop we still grow today.
so this is the story of bread as we know it now.
what we need to do is to go back to understanding what our food is about.
and this is where i have to query all of you.
how many of you can actually tell wheat apart from other cereals?
how many of you actually can make a bread in this way, without starting with a bread machine or just some kind of packaged flavor?
do you know how much a loaf of bread actually costs?
it was invented by farmers in iraq and syria in particular.
this is where it all comes from, and where these farmers who actually, ten thousand years ago, put us on the road of bread.
in fact we do not want this poor woman to work the land like this.
and we do not want to relegate the urban poor to starvation.
so we must find other solutions.
i feel so strongly that you cannot ask a small farmer to work the land and bend over to grow a hectare of rice, 150,000 times, just to plant a crop and weed it.
you cannot ask people to work under these conditions.
but yes there are some solutions.
well first of all i think we can do much better on the existing technologies.
we do not need to spill the water if we don't want to.
we need to think that land is multi-functional.
there are all kinds of ways we can do it.
we cannot solve the world food problem by using biological agriculture.
but we can do a lot more.
and the main thing that i would really ask all of you as you go back to your countries, or as you stay here: ask your government for an integrated food policy.
there is all kinds of things we can do.
but there is something you must do.
you must go back and think about your own food chain.
when was the last time you went to a farm and talked to a farmer?
understand where you are in the food chain, where your food comes from.
understand that you are part of this enormous chain of events.
and the kind of simplistic solutions that we sometimes have, to think that doing everything by hand is going to be the solution, is really not morally justified.
we need to help to lift them out of poverty.
we need to make them proud of being a farmer because they allow us to survive.
never before, as i said, has the responsibility for food been in the hands of so few.
and never before have we had the luxury of taking it for granted because it is now so cheap.
let me share with those of you here in the first row.
let me share some of the food with you.
and as you eat it, and as you try it -- please come and stand up.
every meal you eat contains ingredients from all across the world.
we first began by looking at heart disease, and when i began doing this work 26 or 27 years ago, it was thought that once you have heart disease it can only get worse.
and what we found was that, instead of getting worse and worse, in many cases it could get better and better, and much more quickly than people had once realized.
this is the natural history of heart disease, but its really not natural because we found it could get better and better, and much more quickly than people had once thought.
we also found that the more people change, the better they got.
and the following year they sent me this one, which i thought was kind of funny.
what are you going to give me?"
there are lots of ways we have of avoiding and numbing and bypassing pain, but the point of all of this is to deal with the cause of the problem.
you feel kind of sleepy afterwards.
and the paradox is that when you make big changes, you get big benefits, and you feel so much better so quickly.
i want to talk a little bit about the obesity epidemic, because it really is a problem.
and just to show you this, this is from the cdc.
well, this is one way to lose weight that works very well ...
you want to lose weight in a way that enhances your health rather than the one that harms it.
and so, you might start to lose weight and start to attract people towards you, but when they get too close its going to be a problem.
so when you go on these kinds of diet, they begin to smell bad.
so, there are lots of reasons for eating this way that go beyond just your health.
we need to do something about that.
and its in a sense the most selfish thing that we can do.
just take a look at one study.
one group of people just met for an hour-and-a-half once a week in a support group.
they just met once a week for a year.
five years later, those women lived twice as long, and you can see that the people -- and that was the only difference between the groups.
and so he went up on the board and he wrote the word "illness," and circled the first letter, and then wrote the word "wellness," and circled the first two letters ...
and then we can enjoy our lives more fully without getting sick in the process.
because that is the only way i'm going to get my story across to you.
we are actually the first species on earth to be so prolific to actually threaten our own survival.
and today is a time for me to talk to you about water.
and, of course, watch it fall from the sky and flow in our wonderful rivers, but for several other reasons as well.
there is very high mortality in little baby reptiles who are just 10 to 12 inches long.
this first encounter was kind of like the maasai boy who kills the lion to become a warrior.
it really changed my life totally.
it was very important for us to get through to the people.
and through the children is usually the way to go.
and it really works to start with them.
this gives you an idea of the size of some of these snakes.
the people of this part of india worship the king cobra.
they called us to catch it.
now we are able to follow them and find out their secrets, where the babies go after they hatch, and remarkable things like this you're about to see.
this was just a few days ago in agumbe.
i had the pleasure of being close to this large king cobra who had caught a venomous pit viper.
usually they eat something a bit larger.
and our job is to convince the authorities that these forests have to be protected.
and this is one of the ways we do it, by learning as much as we can about something so remarkable and so iconic in the rainforests there, in order to help protect trees, animals and of course the water sources.
it seems that our citizens find the best way to dispose of garbage are in water sources.
it is an animal which has been on the earth for just about 100 million years.
even though it grows to 20 feet long, since it eats only fish it's not dangerous to human beings.
this was actually just taken last year.
i was there for a lot of the necropsies on the riverside.
and we actually looked through all their organs and tried to figure out what was going on.
because these rivers are the lifeblood of people all along their course.
and there still are quite a few around.
we've got a lot of a good team of people working up there.
but out on the rivers there are still millions of people who are in really bad shape.
but i think the final note really is that we can do it.
and the final word is that there is a king cobra looking over our shoulders.
and there is a gharial looking at us from the river.
and these are powerful water totems.
and they are going to disturb our dreams until we do the right thing.
and there might be quite a few people here who would be very glad to see the last king cobra bite the dust.
how do you really get them to care?
but you seem to have more hair.
i was born with some form of disease.
so i'd like to start with a little bit of history on the project.
we took a lot of meetings and we seriously considered it.
but at the time we had to throw in the towel.
it happened to be this guy.
we even ruled out the idea of using makeup.
you have to build the face up.
there was lots of money and reputations at stake.
but we believed that we had a very solid methodology that might work ...
and we did it in about five weeks.
but we used lots of cheats and shortcuts.
this was the first test for benjamin button.
we had to hold up an hour of a movie with a character.
so we had a big problem: we didn't know how we were going to do this.
but we did know one thing.
you take the big problem and you break it down into smaller pieces and you start to attack that.
so we had three main areas that we had to focus on.
we needed to make brad look a lot older -- needed to age him 45 years or so.
and we also needed to make sure that we could take brad's idiosyncrasies, his little tics, the little subtleties that make him who he is and have that translate through our process so that it appears in benjamin on the screen.
and the work had to hold up for almost the first hour of the movie.
so we needed a system that would allow benjamin to do everything a human being can do.
and what we realized was that what we needed was the information that was going on between the markers.
so we were left with this idea that we ended up calling "technology stew."
we started to look out in other fields.
so this became the foundation of our research as we went forward.
this was when we had our "aha!"
so we ended up with literally thousands and thousands and thousands of shapes, a complete database of all possibilities that his face is capable of doing.
we need to put another 40 years on him at this point.
and so now we had three age increments of benjamin in the computer.
but we needed to get a database of him doing more than that.
and so we could choose numbers of positions on the face to pull that data from.
so this was how the finished shot appeared in the film.
and here you can see the body actor.
so we had one person focused on the eye system for almost two full years.
we had to age the teeth over time.
we had one person devoted to the tongue for about nine months.
so it did take humans to kind of push it one way or another.
and we found this right in this very state, in karnataka.
and the bear cubs were being harvested from across the country and being sold and traded.
they already have four children beside them.
these guys could go to jail for up to seven years if they were caught by authorities.
and what they were doing to the bears was really appalling.
and they use a red hot iron needle to make a hole through the muzzle.
now we had to start changing these people and converting them from using that for a livelihood, to getting something else.
and then it started, there was no turning back after that.
then there was no looking back at all for us.
the women were just not allowed to come out of the community and work with mainstream society.
and they were never allowed to go to school because they were an extra earning hand at home.
this is what happens to the bears when they come in.
and this is what we turn them into.
the big news that i want to announce today is that next month we will be bringing in the very last bear of india, into our rescue center.
and the people can hold their heads up high.
and the beautiful bears can of course live in the wild again.
but the reason i put this up here is because when i was in africa last year, my wife and i were driving around, we had this wonderful guide, who showed us something that surprised both of us, and it was very revealing in terms of the fascination that comes with the design of animals.
and they brought quite a bit of this stuff.
when i started talking to richard about what i was going to speak about, i had recently come back from jordan, where i had an amazing experience with a camel.
and we were driving in what they told us was their very, very best jeep.
this went on about six or seven times, and we were getting more and more alarmed, and we were also getting deeper and deeper into the desert.
we just get out and walk."
about every 10 steps, they lean back and try to take a chunk out of your leg.
so we kept on going, and this camel kept on trying to take a chunk out of my leg.
and much meaner, by the way, than the bedouin who greeted me and tried to sell me one of his 26 daughters to take back to the states.
i think the camel is the best designed animal in the world."
and you should be really glad we decided not to bring the camel.
so i did the next best thing.
i want you to get as close to that camel as you possibly can."
we went down there, and i took one look at this camel.
do you want to roll the film?
and they use them in the same way we use our binocular vision.
he will do the same thing.
but i would put him closer to 2,000.
and it makes him very dangerous at this time of year.
in the pen beside him is jasmine.
but before i do, i just want to mention that this animal truly is a sort of the suv of the sand, the ship of the desert.
long legs that allow heat to escape.
but go without for more than a month.
my dung is burned as fuel.
my milk is used for cheese.
i just want to leave you with one last thought, which is probably the most important thing to take away.
and i think when you look at the animal kingdom, that is one of the most remarkable things.
and the way i'm going to do that is present to you five animations of five of my poems.
and let me just tell you a little bit of how that came about.
start a meeting with a poem.
that would be an idea you might take with you.
so let us start with the first one.
writing is not actually as easy as that for me.
but i like to pretend that it comes with ease.
so i like to at least pretend it just flows out.
but other days i am the one who is lifted up by the ribs then lowered into the dining room of a dollhouse to sit with the others at the long table.
but how would you like it if you never knew from one day to the next if you were going to spend it striding around like a vivid god, your shoulders in the clouds, or sitting down there amidst the wallpaper staring straight ahead with your little plastic face?
it has floated away down a dark mythological river whose name begins with an l as far as you can recall, well on your own way to oblivion where you will join those who have forgotten even how to swim and how to ride a bicycle.
no wonder you rise in the middle of the night to look up the date of a famous battle in a book on war.
no wonder the moon in the window seems to have drifted out of a love poem that you used to know by heart.
and we would visit each other.
i wondered about you when you told me never to leave a box of wooden strike-anywhere matches just lying around the house, because the mice might get into them and start a fire.
and that to me was a bad start to the afterlife, having to witness your own funeral and feel gratified.
while we are putting on our shoes or making a sandwich, they are looking down through the glass-bottom boats of heaven as they row themselves slowly through eternity.
they watch the tops of our heads moving below on earth.
and when we lie down in a field or on a couch, drugged perhaps by the hum of a warm afternoon, they think we are looking back at them, which makes them lift their oars and fall silent and wait like parents for us to close our eyes.
i just have time to read a more recent poem to you.
"do you realize that if you had started building the parthenon on the day you were born, you would be all done in only one more year?
of course, there will be time for all that later in your life, after you come out of your room and begin to blossom, or at least pick up all your socks.
but then she was beheaded, so never mind her as a role model.
we think you're special just being you -- playing with your food and staring into space.
and here comes a second follower.
if you really care about starting a movement, have the courage to follow and show others how to follow.
so first i started with the mind.
and this was an amazing year.
as i mentioned last year, i grew up with no religion at all.
so i decided to follow all the rules of the bible.
so this is what i looked like by the end.
i was listening to all the experts and talking to sort of a board of medical advisers.
and they were telling me all the things i had to do.
i wrote the book on a treadmill, and it took me about a thousand miles to write the book.
i had to put on sunscreen.
this was no small feat, because if you listen to dermatologists, they say that you should have a shot glass full of sunscreen.
and you have to reapply it every two to four hours.
so i think half of my book advance went into sunscreen.
there was the washing of hands.
i had to do that properly.
so that took a lot of time.
so they believe you should not just wear helmets for biking, but also for walking around.
so something to think about tonight if you've had a couple.
but i also learned that i was too healthy, and that was unhealthy.
i was so focused on doing all these things that i was neglecting my friends and family.
it was like something out of caligula.
let me just tell you two really quickly.
because we live in such a noisy world.
and it was done in europe.
and you can almost trick yourself into thinking you're eating doritos.
the book about it comes out in april.
and i hope that i don't get sick during the book tour.
or perhaps an ordinary person like you or me?
so you see up there one such object.
so how big do you think that is?
so what were these used for?
there's a last group of people who believe that the indus people were the ancestors of people living in south india today.
and so it was then that i realized there was an opportunity for me to collaborate with these scientists, and so i jumped at that opportunity.
and i'd like to describe some of the results that we have found.
the first thing that you need to do when you have an undeciphered script is try to figure out the direction of writing.
can you tell me if the direction of writing is right to left or left to right?
one of the signs is also below the text on the top.
if i give you the letter q and ask you to predict the next letter, what do you think that would be?
now if i asked you to predict one more letter, what do you think that would be?
and this is very similar to a q and u example.
how many of you have ever spilled coffee on a keyboard?
and both of these are very, very flexible, which is why you find them in the very high range.
i even started to get some hate mail.
my students said that i should really seriously consider getting some protection.
what does this result really show?
it shows that the indus script shares an important property of language.
the same thing happens in the case of the indus script.
we went back and looked at where these particular texts were found, and it turns out that they were found very, very far away from the indus valley.
and why were they found there?
and what seems to have happened here is that the indus traders, the merchants, were using this script to write a foreign language.
can you write it using pictures?
so we have no way of validating these particular readings, but if more and more of these readings start making sense, and if longer and longer sequences appear to be correct, then we know that we are on the right track.
what would we find out about them?
and i feel like this whole evening has been very amazing to me.
but the young people all came.
and they brought this kind of a jeweled parasol, and they put it on the ground.
everyone looked in that, and they saw in there the total interconnectedness of all life in all universes.
so they don't -- when they look out and they see those lights that you showed in the sky -- they don't just see sort of pieces of matter burning or rocks or flames or gases exploding.
and of course, we all will be deeply disappointed when we do.
because we think that because we are kind of tired of what we do, a little bit tired, we do suffer.
and occasionally we get together with another person stuck in their skin and the two of us enjoy each other, and each one tries to get out of their own, and ultimately it fails of course, and then we're back into this thing.
what do they want from me?
who is it who's going to get enough attention from the world?
you can experience yourself as the other beings when you see through the delusion of being separated from them.
i go from birth to death.
imagine if i had to feel even a hundred other people's suffering.
the dalai lama always likes to say -- he says that when you give birth in your mind to the idea of compassion, it's because you realize that you yourself and your pains and pleasures are finally too small a theater for your intelligence.
the good time is over when you think, how good is it?
i love that leilei said that the way of helping those who are suffering badly on the physical plane or on other planes is having a good time, doing it by having a good time.
they took it all away by violence, saying they were going to give it to everyone, and then they were even worse.
so what could possibly change this terrible gap that has opened up in the world today?
and so then he looks at me.
it should be done by fun.
you have to find some vision where you see how hopeful it is, how it can be changed.
the human being is almost out of time.
i'm going to think of how other people can be happy.
but the story of how we came to understand the universe is just as much a story of listening as it is by looking.
how many of you here could describe the sound of a single planet or star?
and you may wonder, how do we know what these sounds are?
how can we tell the difference between the sound of the sun and the sound of a pulsar?
so what were these strange noises?
he had accidentally been the first person to tune in to them.
so our story ends at the beginning -- the beginning of all things, the big bang.
i want you to imagine that you're a student in my lab.
and it is a true challenge, and i do want you to help me.
so please send me your ideas about how to design a foot.
we have to first know what a foot is.
but if you wanted to really do research, what do you have to do?
so you go to the literature.
and i want you to help me do that in this next clip.
now it turns out that animals can go anywhere.
now how could it do that?
when we slow it down 50 times we see how the leg is hitting that simulated debris.
the leg is acting as a foot.
take a look at their feet.
and the next behavior i'll show you of this animal just stunned us the first time that we saw it.
take a look at what that is!
it walks on two legs and it holds the other arms up in the air so that it can't be seen.
and look what it does with its foot to get over challenging terrain.
he thought he created an animal fantasy.
you can see it here well on this debris.
now, you might have noticed something else about the animals when they were running over the rough terrain.
maybe we could give it to our curator and see if he'd be brave enough to touch the cockroach.
rf: so if you look carefully at this, what you see is that they have spines and until a few weeks ago, no one knew what they did.
and where they have a problem with this kind of mesh, because they don't have spines.
so why not add a spine?
but look at this animal do it!
we can actually model that behavior better as a fluid, if you look at it.
can you use this to make a better robot?
these are all from different insects.
this is the foot of an ant.
you see the hairs and the claws and this thing here.
watch what happens when the foot goes onto your sandwich.
and this was a hard shot to get -- i think this is the shot of the ant foot on the superstrings.
it certainly helps it to hold on.
now we have something better here.
and each hair has the worst case of split ends possible.
you can hear it go up.
and here it is coming up at you, in its first steps up a wall.
but we think we got the dynamics right of the robot.
and so they were able to get this thing -- this is now sped up 20 times -- can you imagine it trying to go up and rescue somebody at that upper floor?
can i say how delighted i am to be away from the calm of westminster and whitehall?
a man before a tank became a picture that became a symbol for the whole world of resistance.
and what do all these pictures and events have in common?
what they have in common is what we see unlocks what we cannot see.
what i think these pictures demonstrate is that we do believe in something bigger than ourselves.
what these pictures demonstrate is that there is a moral sense across all religions, across all faiths, across all continents -- a moral sense that not only do we share the pain of others, and believe in something bigger than ourselves but we have a duty to act when we see things that are wrong that need righted, see injuries that need to be corrected, see problems that need to be rectified.
our responsibility is to let everyone have the chance to realize their potential to the full.
i believe there is a moral sense and a global ethic that commands attention from people of every religion and every faith, and people of no faith.
we now have the capacity to find common ground with people who we will never meet, but who we will meet through the internet and through all the modern means of communication; that we now have the capacity to organize and take collective action together to deal with the problem or an injustice that we want to deal with; and i believe that this makes this a unique age in human history, and it is the start of what i would call the creation of a truly global society.
they won public opinion over a long period of time.
but it took 24 years for the campaign to be successful.
what could they have done with the pictures that they could have shown if they were able to use the modern means of communication to win peoples hearts and minds?
or if you take eglantyne jebb, the woman who created save the children 90 years ago.
200 years ago the problem we had to solve was slavery.
150 years ago i suppose the main problem in a country like ours was how young people, children, had the right to education.
100 years ago in most countries in europe, the pressure was for the right to vote.
i was at a concert that he was attending to mark his birthday and for the creation of new resources for his foundation.
my husband too has spent a long time in prison."
we cannot solve these problems unless we work together.
one of the things that has got to come out of copenhagen in the next few months is an agreement that there will be a global environmental institution that is able to deal with the problems of persuading the whole of the world to move along a climate-change agenda.
one of the reasons why an institution is not in itself enough is that we have got to persuade people around the world to change their behavior as well, so you need that global ethic of fairness and responsibility across the generations.
or take the girl i met when i was in tanzania, a girl called miriam.
she was 11 years old; her parents had both died from aids, her mother and then her father.
she herself was suffering from hiv; she was suffering from tuberculosis.
when you looked in her eyes, any girl at the age of eleven is looking forward to the future, but there was an unreachable sadness in that girls eyes and if i could have translated that to the rest of the world for that moment, i believe that all the work that it had done for the global hiv/aids fund would be rewarded by people being prepared to make donations.
take the problems of human rights and the problems of security in so many countries around the world.
and that young boy believed our promises that we would help people in difficulty in rwanda, and we never did.
we can see all the way out to the edge of the observable universe, all the way back in time, almost to the moment of the big bang itself.
we see these magnificent star nurseries, where nature has somehow arranged for just the right numbers and just the right sizes of stars to be born for life to arise.
but until now, our view of the universe has been disconnected and fragmented, and i think that many of the marvelous stories that nature has to tell us have fallen through the cracks.
and in telling stories, each of us is going to understand the universe in our own way.
they can produce loud clicks and listen for echoes from the sea floor in order to orient.
they can listen for echoes from prey in order to decide where food is and to decide which one they want to eat.
and mother and young and closely bonded animals use calls to stay in touch with one another, so sound is really critical for their lives.
a lot of my career has been devoted to trying to understand how these animals use their learning, use the ability to change what you say based on what you hear in their own communication systems.
how about the setting in which animals need to use this call?
in normal life for mother and calf dolphin, they'll often drift apart or swim apart if mom is chasing a fish, and when they separate they have to get back together again.
so when dolphins are separating by less than 20 meters, less than half the time they need to use whistles.
most of the time they can just find each other just by swimming around.
when a male dolphin leaves mom, it will often join up with another male and form an alliance, which may last for decades.
they both have that kind of up-sweep.
let's now take a step back and see what this message can tell us about protecting dolphins from human disturbance.
so even in the situation that doesn't look as bad as this, it's still affecting the amount of time these animals have to do their normal work.
when we think of marine-protected areas for animals like dolphins, this means that we have to be quite conscious about activities that we thought were benign.
but i'd also like to point out that the oceans are much more connected than we think.
this means that humpback song is a form of animal culture, just like music for humans would be.
i think one of the most interesting examples of this comes from australia.
they just sang the cool new west coast song.
you only hear the low frequencies.
you hear the reverberation as the sound travels over long-range in the ocean and is not quite as loud.
but you can still hear that faint call.
the most dominant sound that humans put into the ocean comes from shipping.
this is the sound of a ship, and i'm having to talk a little louder to talk over it.
now this is something that's been known for quite a while.
so here we have the loudness of a call at the whale.
and this is the kind of call that is used by, say, right whale mothers and calves as they separate to come back again.
and we now know that whales can compensate for noise by calling louder, like i did when that ship was playing, by waiting for silence and by shifting their call out of the noise band.
if we also have to wait for silence, they may miss a critical opportunity to communicate.
so we have to be very concerned about when the noise in habitats degrades the habitat enough that the animals either have to pay too much to be able to communicate, or are not able to perform critical functions.
the first case comes from the bay of fundy.
they rush as fast as they can to get to their port.
but then they often wait there.
they could slow down by about 50 percent.
i hope these examples have shown some of the different directions we can take in addition to protected areas to be able to keep the ocean safe for whales to be able to continue to communicate.
they can use both my hands; i can use chording actions; i can just go right up and use all 10 fingers if i wanted to.
what's really interesting here is what you can do with it and the kind of interfaces you can build on top of it.
i can inject heat into the system here, or i can pull it apart with two of my fingers.
this started out as kind of a screensaver app that one of the ph.d.
i can do that grossly with both of my hands, or i can do it just with two fingers on each of my hands together.
this is something that i think is really the way we should be interacting with machines from this point on.
of course i can do it with all my hands.
i can create big things out here, but i can go back and really quickly go back to where i started, and make even smaller things here.
now this is going to be really important as we start getting to things like data visualization.
and one of the reasons why i think that is, is because -- we'll be helped by things like graphics and visualization and inference tools, but i also think a big part of it is going to be starting to be able to have better interfaces, to be able to drill down into this kind of data, while still thinking about the big picture here.
let me show you another app here.
and so the last thing i want to show you is -- you know, i'm sure we can all think of a lot of entertainment apps that you can do with this thing.
but the neat thing about it is i can add control points.
and then what i can do is manipulate them with both of my fingers at the same time.
and you notice what it does.
i'm not the only one doing it; there are a lot of other people getting into it.
i think we have a problem in mexico.
what we don't agree on is what the problem actually is.
i think none of these is the problem.
but we won't be able to take care of any of those things if we don't solve the real problem we have in mexico first.
the real problem we have is most of us mexicans, we believe we are victims of our circumstances.
we are a country of victims.
what if none of these things is the problem?
the problem is that we play the role of victims.
we need to open our eyes and see that we are not victims.
if only we stopped feeling like victims, if we stopped acting as victims, our country would change so much!
we want to go on with our daily life even though we are not living under normal circumstances.
does that make streets more or less safe?
this vicious circle ends up with the whole population stuck inside their houses, scared to death -- even more afraid than when we were out on the streets.
we go from fear to rage.
and for over a year he has known that a price has been put on his head.
they just have to raise their hands.
i think anyone who has stepped foot on this land -- not to mention all mexican people -- will agree that it's not difficult to love mexico.
mexico is our mother and today she cries out for her children.
we are going through the darkest moment in our recent history.
what are we going to do?
where is the soldier in each son?
we need men and women who love mexico and who are willing to take action.
this is a call for every true mexican to join this initiative.
but no one can kill the spirit of true mexicans.
the battle is won, but we still have to fight it.
you might just change your mind after watching moschen in motion.
one of the great things was that my father was an avid golfer, but he was lefty.
you can change the rhythm, if you get out of the lights.
or you can go back and change the height.
and you could play with the rhythm.
hands out in front of you.
so what i want you to do is just listen to me and do it.
but i want you to do is also, with your eyes, is follow the colored ball that i ask you to follow.
the reason i wanted you to do this is because that's actually what most people face throughout their lives, a moment of learning, a moment of challenge.
why the hell should i learn this?
does it really have anything to do with anything in my life?
but is it going to get you anywhere?
talking about time in a moment.
how can you look at time?
and then it comes to rest.
just a little thing about time.
are we ready to do that?
this is the piece that i told you about.
this is a little thing that i made because i really like the idea of curves and balls together.
sometimes these pieces are mathematical, in that way that i look at a shape and say, what about if i use this and this and this.
sometimes what happens in life affects my choice of objects that i try to work with.
so, if you want to go with the music for cylinders.
i like not to know for as long as possible.
and what it involves, and i don't know if my hands are too beaten up to do it or not, but i'll do a little bit of it.
and so it was great fun in those days, and some of those of you who are in the audience were my clients.
that was a really good time.
and i took a lot of pictures last year; very few people knew what i was up to, but i took a lot of pictures.
they seem to be everywhere now.
lots of lives are being saved by those.
it's taken into the dressing room, and in the dressing room there are scanners so that we know exactly what clothing you have in the dressing room.
the last time i went to see this store, there was a huge buzz about people standing outside and wondering, "am i going to actually get to see the people changing clothes here?"
so you can see what you look like from the back or all the way around, as you look.
and so you can see that the goal is to bring some of the feedback that the people who had gone to the museum were giving, and get it up on the wall so everybody could see.
there's lots of room, so people can come up and understand what it is before they get involved.
they go to the top of the wall and when they reach all the way to the top, after they've bounced around, they disperse into bits and go off into the atmosphere.
so you feel that in your cubicle.
so this building actually celebrates the water as it comes out of the recycling plant and goes into the reed bed so that it can be filtered for the final time.
it becomes your eyes and ears as you venture into the deep.
and he noticed that for weddings and funerals there they could find enough money to put something together.
what they do now is: they can grow crops in the rainy season but they can't grow them in the off-season.
so i just have one more thing to say.
everything that matters except every thing and except matter.
and the closer we look at anything, the more it disappears.
a few days later he received a letter from a constituent saying how much she admired him, had met him at a fete and asking for a signed photograph.
i have no idea what any of you are thinking.
my son asked me this the other day, he said, "dad, can you remember what i was like when i was two?"
you cannot remember what happened to you earlier than the age of two or three, which is great news for psychoanalysts, because otherwise they'd be out of a job.
you can see it in skin and this kind of stuff.
but every cell in your body is replaced at some point.
but at the end of seven years, not one cell in your body remains from what was there seven years ago.
what is this thing that we hang on, that is actually us?
i find that extraordinary, not to be able to see light, not to be able to see darkness.
what we learned from 5 million books
but we at harvard were wondering if this was really true.
so erez and i were thinking about ways to get a big picture of human culture and human history: change over time.
so many books actually have been written over the years.
so we were thinking, well the best way to learn from them is to read all of these millions of books.
what you really want to do is to get to the awesome yet practical part of this space.
ela: let me tell you a little bit about where books come from.
we do that for all the words and phrases that appear in those books, and that gives us a big table of two billion lines that tell us about the way culture has been changing.
let me give you an example.
let's suppose that i am thriving, then tomorrow i want to tell you about how well i did.
well which one should i use?
jm: you might also want to have a look at this particular n-gram, and that's to tell nietzsche that god is not dead, although you might agree that he might need a better publicist.
for instance, let me tell you the history of the year 1950.
but nothing got people interested in 1950 like the year 1950.
they couldn't stop talking about all the things they did in 1950, all the things they were planning to do in 1950, all the dreams of what they wanted to accomplish in 1950.
and the story of 1950 is the story of every year that we have on record, with a little twist, because now we've got these nice charts.
and because we have these nice charts, we can measure things.
and it turns out that we can measure that very precisely.
we are losing interest in the past more rapidly.
so here you will become famous by the end of your 50s, and become very, very famous afterward.
one mistake you should not do is become a mathematician.
and this looks like the normal trajectory of a famous person.
he gets more and more and more famous, except if you look in german.
now these signals are actually so strong that we don't need to know that someone was censored.
and we just divide one by the other to produce something we call a suppression index.
people talked about it twice less as it should have been.
there are many people who end up on the far left on this distribution who are talked about 10 times fewer than they should have been.
but then also many people on the far right who seem to benefit from propaganda.
the great thing about culturomics is that everyone can do it.
jm: now this was used over a million times on the first day, and this is really the best of all the queries.
so people want to be their best, put their best foot forward.
ela: people have been using this for all kinds of fun purposes.
this person was interested in the history of frustration.
we think that might have something to do with reagan.
one of them is pattern recognition.
these filters take us from all sound down to what we pay attention to.
when i married my wife, i promised her that i would listen to her every day as if for the first time.
now that's something i fall short of on a daily basis.
and sound places us in time as well, because sound always has time embedded in it.
in fact, i would suggest that our listening is the main way that we experience the flow of time from past to future.
well there are a lot of reasons for this.
our media have to scream at us with these kinds of headlines in order to get our attention.
just three minutes a day of silence is a wonderful exercise to reset your ears and to recalibrate so that you can hear the quiet again.
so even if you're in a noisy environment like this -- and we all spend a lot of time in places like this -- listen in the coffee bar to how many channels of sound can i hear?
you can do it in a beautiful place as well, like in a lake.
how many birds am i hearing?
or just try this one on for size.
i call that the hidden choir.
this is playing with those filters.
these are just some of the listening positions, or scales of listening positions, that you can use.
i wrote a whole book about it.
but i believe that every human being needs to listen consciously in order to live fully -- connected in space and in time to the physical world around us, connected in understanding to each other, not to mention spiritually connected, because every spiritual path i know of has listening and contemplation at its heart.
and if we can teach listening in our schools, we can take our listening off that slippery slope to that dangerous, scary world that i talked about and move it to a place where everybody is consciously listening all the time -- or at least capable of doing it.
thank you for listening to me today.
so what i'm going to talk about is why we don't have a good brain theory, why it is important that we should develop one and what we can do about it.
and i've done this because i really believe that mobile computing is the future of personal computing, and i'm trying to make the world a little bit better by working on these things.
i really didn't want to do any of these products and very early in my career i decided i was not going to be in the computer industry.
and before i tell you about that, i just have to tell you this one little picture of graffiti there i picked off the web the other day.
this is not a real brain.
and they talked about the neuron and development and disease and vision and all the things you might want to know about brains.
and one might have the impression that we really knew a lot about brains.
and so i fell in love with this, and said look, we have all this knowledge about brains.
and this is something we can work on my lifetime.
but i was a little disappointed -- pretty young -- but i went back again a few years later and this time was in california, and i went to berkeley.
i said, but i can make a difference in this field.
our bodies are hanging along for the ride, but my brain is talking to your brain.
and if we want to understand who we are and how we feel and perceive, we really understand what brains are.
and people have been working on it for 100 years.
and theory has not played a role in any sort of grand way in the neurosciences.
now why has this come about?
what good is more going to do?
my daughters understood these three theories in their basic framework by the time they were in kindergarten.
in the case of the solar system, the idea that the earth is spinning and the surface of the earth is going like a thousand miles an hour, and the earth is going through the solar system about a million miles an hour.
do you feel like you're moving a thousand miles an hour?
it can do all kinds of stuff.
and nature did a little trick.
so let me give you a few examples of predictions.
i already said the word "sentence."
and these things happen all the time.
i can make it larger or smaller, i can change its brass to silver, i could make it a lever.
i can change a thousand things about your door, and in the two seconds you take to open your door, you're going to notice that something has changed.
it has all the door attributes.
what your brain is doing is making constant predictions all the time about what is going to happen in your environment.
as i put my hand on this table, i expect to feel it stop.
this is a picture of a woman.
and when you look at people, your eyes are caught over at two to three times a second.
this is to this as this is to this.
what is the next number in this sentence?
i would love to have more time to tell you we're making fantastic progress in this thing, and i expect to be back up on this stage, maybe this will be some other time in the not too distant future and tell you about it.
this is not going to take 50 years at all.
what is this going to result in?
are we going to really build intelligent machines?
the new brain is actually kind of easier than the old brain.
those are the things that are going to happen first.
i know a lot of people who invented the microprocessor and if you talk to them, they knew what they were doing was really significant, but they didn't really know what was going to happen.
the one i'm going to make is that it is time for us to reclaim what peace really means.
when i see the symbols of the rainbow and the dove, i think of personal serenity.
i do not think about what i consider to be peace, which is sustainable peace with justice and equality.
we need a little bit of police; we need a little bit of military, but for defense.
it is not getting other countries to arm themselves to the teeth with the weapons that we produce and we sell them.
it is using that money more rationally to make the countries of the world secure, to make the people of the world secure.
i certainly support the start vote.
but it's going to modernize weapons we do not need and will not be gotten rid of in our lifetime, unless we get up off our ...
and take action to make it happen, unless we begin to believe that all of the things that we've been hearing about in these last two days are elements of what come together to make human security.
it is all of those things.
it is using our money for all of those things.
we need that in the world.
i do not believe that meditation and prayer will change this world.
i think what we need is action."
you probably also know that she has spent 15 of the last 20 years imprisoned for her efforts to bring about democracy.
she is already out in the streets, working with the party to try to rebuild it.
she has been in exile for the last year and a half.
you ask her where she lives -- where does she live in exile?
she is traveling because she was out of the country at the time of the elections.
we need to be able to talk to you out there, so that you can give the message of what's happening here."
working for peace is very creative.
people could not gather without getting busted and taken to jail.
working together is what changes our world.
there was a mother and three children.
the children were killed on the spot.
she also received the peace prize.
she is now running for president.
one of the things that made this campaign work is because we grew from two ngos to thousands in 90 countries around the world, working together in common cause to ban landmines.
some of the people who worked in our campaign could only work maybe an hour a month.
and if each of us who cares about the different things we care about got up off our butts and volunteered as much time as we could, we would change this world, we would save this world.
we have to do it ourselves.
i was only four years old when i saw my mother load a washing machine for the very first time in her life.
that was a great day for my mother.
my mother and father had been saving money for years to be able to buy that machine, and the first day it was going to be used, even grandma was invited to see the machine.
and now she was going to watch electricity do that work.
there are two billion fellow human beings who live on less than two dollars a day.
because it remains hard work for women to wash.
and sometimes they also have to bring water from far away to do the laundry at home, or they have to bring the laundry away to a stream far off.
and they want the washing machine.
they don't want to spend such a large part of their life doing this hard work with so relatively low productivity.
and there's nothing different in their wish than it was for my grandma.
how can we tell this woman that she ain't going to have a washing machine?
and no one raised their hand.
so how come [this is] something that everyone uses and they think others will not stop it?
and these ones who have washing machines, but not a house full of other machines, they use two.
and they will start to use as much as the old west are doing already.
and we hope that the poor people will get into the electric light.
so what needs to be done?
of course they must be more energy-efficient.
they must change behavior in some way.
they must also start to produce green energy, much more green energy.
this is what we hope may happen.
but i can assure you that this woman in the favela in rio, she wants a washing machine.
and now we can go to the library."
because this is the magic: you load the laundry, and what do you get out of the machine?
and mother got time to read for me.
and she also got books for herself.
but people think that my job is to let the good words make that difficult left-hand turn into the dictionary, and keep the bad words out.
and for another, deciding what words are good and what words are bad is actually not very easy.
and when parts of your job are not easy or fun, you kind of look for an excuse not to do them.
so if i had to think of some kind of occupation as a metaphor for my work, i would much rather be a fisherman.
but why do people want me to direct traffic, when i would much rather go fishing?
why do i blame the queen?
our idea of what a dictionary is has not changed since her reign.
i do not have that hat.
i wish i had that hat.
i would go on a hunger strike before i let them take away google book search from me.
why am i throwing this away?"
some of my best friends are books.
but the book is not the best shape for the dictionary.
there will still be paper dictionaries.
what if we made aesthetic judgments about animals, and only the ones we thought were cute were the ones that we could study?
and i think this is a problem.
i think we should study all the words, because when you think about words, you can make beautiful expressions from very humble parts.
it doesn't make a word any more real than any other way.
and i'm not even talking about polysemy, which is the greedy habit some words have of taking more than one meaning for themselves.
do you know what that says to me?
see, i just gave you a lot of words and a lot of numbers, and this is more of a visual explanation.
if we think of the dictionary as being the map of the english language, these bright spots are what we know about, and the dark spots are where we are in the dark.
so a word without its source is like a cut flower.
and one of the problems of knowing a word like "synecdochically" is that you really want an excuse to say "synecdochically."
this whole talk has just been an excuse to get me to the point where i could say "synecdochically" to all of you.
if we get a bigger pan, then we can put all the words in.
we can put in all the meanings.
and we can make the dictionary not just be a symbol of the language -- we can make it be the whole language.
thank you very much for your kind attention.
and they were friends, and they hugged each other and they were laughing, and their faces were like this far apart.
and they were moving and grinding and moving their arms up and down each other.
and then he describes the home he owned in their village.
you can see it in the way we raise our young kids.
and you can usually tell the uber-moms because they actually weigh less than their own children.
it would be a big seller.
they get there and they realize it's fashionable now to have dogs a third as tall as your ceiling heights.
you see them on the mountains up there.
and so this is part of what life is, but it's not all of what life is.
another finding is that the unconscious, far from being dumb and sexualized, is actually quite smart.
and one of the things he's really shown us is that emotions are not separate from reason, but they are the foundation of reason because they tell us what to value.
it tells us what to imprint.
and so when we see another person, we reenact in our own minds what we see in their minds.
we believe that reason is the highest of the faculties.
it gives us a deeper sense of what it actually takes for us to thrive in this life.
and those people who have models of how to relate have a huge head start in life.
they go through life like sailboats tacking into the wind -- wanting to get close to people, but not really having the models of how to do that.
men drown at twice the rate of women, because men think they can swim across that lake.
one of my colleagues at the times did a great story about soldiers in iraq who could look down a street and detect somehow whether there was an ied, a landmine, in the street.
but this is the source of innovation.
and then the final thing i'll mention is something you might call limerence.
and many of us feel it in love when lovers feel fused.
he was married to a woman named carol, and they had a wonderful relationship.
the greeks say we suffer our way to wisdom.
but the indications of that on her body was that her intestine was outside her body.
all that we know that hundreds of men had used her brutally.
but that's not the only purpose that human beings are sold for.
they are sold in the name of adoption.
they are sold in the name of organ trade.
and i tell you stories from there.
my own journey to work with these children started as a teenager.
i don't remember the rape part of it so much as much as the anger part of it.
you have even the middle class sometimes getting trafficked.
some pay the price for it.
because the men who come to them are not men who want to make you your girlfriends, or who want to have a family with you.
each of the girls that i have rescued -- i have rescued more than 3,200 girls -- each of them tell me one story in common ...
we think it is easy money.
and one day she gives up on you and me, because we have no options for her.
because i had lots of them who were already hiv infected.
and therefore my challenge was to understand how can i get out the power from this pain.
because what we did with these girls is to understand their potential.
you see a girl here who is trained as a welder.
i've been beaten up more than 14 times in my life.
can you get somebody in my house to work, so that she can look after my mother?"
and there is a long pause.
but it is not nice to bring them to our homes.
it's not nice for our children to study with their children.
can you ply your mind for that one way that you can respond to the problem?
can you break your culture of silence?
can you speak to at least two persons about this story?
convince them to tell the story to another two persons.
because they are also a part of us.
they are also part of this world.
this is your conference, and i think you have a right to know a little bit right now, in this transition period, about this guy who's going to be looking after it for you for a bit.
i think that i may have believed unconsciously, then, that i was kind of a business hero.
and i was the 40 percent owner of a dotcom that was about to go public and no doubt be worth billions more.
and all this had come from nothing.
i thought the little graph of my business life that kind of looked a bit like moore's law -- ever upward and to the right -- it was going to go on forever.
i was in for quite a surprise.
i watched everything that i'd built crumbling, and it looked like all this stuff was going to die and 15 years work would have come for nothing.
it took eight years of blood, sweat and tears to reach 350 employees, something which i was very proud of in the business.
i was going around with this big sign on my forehead: "loser."
and i think what disgusts me more than anything, looking back, is how the hell did i let my personal happiness get so tied up with this business thing?
it was at the same ted two years ago when richard and i reached an agreement on the future of ted.
and the way in which you could think about us as a species and us as a planet had just changed so much, and it was incredibly exciting.
we talk about this a lot, and i thought about trying to give an example of this.
and one key way that we're going to do this is to introduce this book club.
i think it will be great.
and as i grew up, it became worse and worse, and i started to think of it as a form of control.
he would hold on to the receiver and expect me to dial a number for him.
and so as a response and as a gift to my uncle, i made him "the uncle phone."
it's so long that it requires two people to use it.
so what he had to do was take a piece of paper, roll it into the carriage, type his email or command and pull the paper out.
and of course, the object had to be very grand and have a sense of ritualism, the way my uncle likes it.
so we had these panels on three walls of a room.
and we had over 500 of these little pygmies hiding behind them.
so this is how it works.
so they get immune to sounds that scare them after awhile.
so we worked very hard to make them as lifelike as possible.
so this is a very early prototype.
how would it be possible to experience a sense of invisibility?
so i'm just going to show you a very early prototype.
so how we used it was in a room where we had a camera looking into the space, and we had one monitor, one on each wall.
and as people walked into the room, they would see themselves in the monitor, except with one difference: one person was constantly invisible wherever they moved in the room.
and it was almost like a sheet of paper, like a cutout of a childlike drawing of an oil spill or a sun.
and from the front, this object appeared to be very strong and robust, and from the side, it almost seemed very weak.
but as soon as they passed by, it would start to climb up the wall in jerky fashion.
and the idea was that at some point you would stop looking at the form of a teddy bear and you would almost perceive it to be a hole in the space, and as if you were looking out into the twinkling night sky.
so we work with a lot of technology, but we don't really love technology, because it gives us a lot of pain in our work over years and years.
the saying is that with climate, those who know the most are the most worried.
with nuclear, those who know the most are the least worried.
he came out with a wonderful book recently called "storms of my grandchildren."
five out of six of us live in the developing world.
we are moving up in the world.
this is one of the most desired things by poor people all over the world, in the cities and in the countryside.
then what happens to the waste?
i love being around these big wind generators.
the governments of the world are going to have to decide that coals need to be made expensive, and these will go ahead.
one is a low estimate, and one is a high estimate.
if we look at the delays, it takes between 10 and 19 years to put up a nuclear power plant from planning to operation.
this includes about three and a half to six years for a site permit.
here are the world wind resources.
this is the choice: you can either have wind or nuclear.
and i want two of each for the mics.
you can make it reliable, as i showed with that diagram.
so if we get that through, then mark will solve these problems.
and we have not had the other side of the argument fully aired so that people can draw their own conclusions.
be very aware of the propaganda.
so if we want to keep the lights on, we actually need a solution which is going to keep generating all of the time.
i will also add one other thing.
none of those things were stirring.
so if you were in palm springs ...
those of you who changed your mind in favor of "for" put your hands up.
the same thing will happen in space.
we are on the verge of the greatest exploration that the human race has ever known.
my plan is to actually buy puts on the precious metal market, and then actually claim that i'm going to go out and get one.
and people left their jobs and they went to obscure locations to go and be part of this amazing mission.
and we knew nothing about going to space.
they had to make up everything.
but i put forward here, the government is not going to get us there.
as we are going out there and taking on a new frontier, we should be allowed to risk.
but people are willing to pay that!
i want to give you the end point.
how much will it cost you and your spacesuit to go to orbit?
they come with their own money.
no one believed it was done.
so, they took a bet that no one would win by january of '05, and i took a bet that someone would win.
one of the things i'm most happy about is that the spaceshipone is going to hang in air and space museum, next to the spirit of st.
when you want the taste that won't weigh you down, the only way to go is up.
if you put up a prize, you can get literally a 50 to one leverage on your dollars.
this is what happens when you put up a prize, when you announce it and teams start to begin doing trials.
it may or may not happen.
and each of these areas was something that we found the ansari x prize helped short-circuit these for innovation.
if we could free ourselves from our education?
and we can play with this.
the forms that i showed before were made actually through very long trial and error.
a very simple form such as this one actually contains a lot of information that may not be visible to the human eye.
a challenge to me was how we could express this new algorithmic order in a column.
so this leads to a new role for the architect.
at one point i simply wanted to jump inside this image, so to say, i bought these red and blue 3d glasses, got up very close to the screen, but still that wasn't the same as being able to walk around and touch things.
but it was very labor intensive.
and the cutting path that the laser followed goes from here to the airport and back again.
so where does this leave us?
what i wanted to do is to show the world that the little things can be the biggest things.
and we use the word "nothing."
my mother told me that, when i was a child, that i should always respect the little things.
what made me do this work?
i shall go into my story.
this all started when i was age five.
my world was seen as less.
so i decided i didn't really want to be a part of that world.
so when my mother used to take me to school, she thought i was at school, and i used to do a u-turn, when her back was turned, and run off and hide in the shed at the back of the garden.
and then i saw her legs.
and as i looked down on the ground, i noticed there was some ants running around.
or do they need somewhere to live?"
and then i sat down and all the ants came along.
and they moved in, and decided not to pay me any rent.
and from there i was watching this little world.
so i realized that there was more to life than just everything that we see around us that's huge.
my mother told me to take it smaller.
now i shall show you something here.
and he says to me "willard, can you put my house on a pinhead?"
some of them were quite jagged.
and some of it was flat.
because that has happened to me.
i found these little bits of glass.
and i had to make them square.
and i started to rub them.
i used a little tweezer which i made from a hair clip.
and then pushing the glass in with its own friction.
and it went like this ...
so to cut the story short, i decided that i had to go back and do it.
and i decided to build it up.
and when i finished it, i came back the next day.
i noticed that the house was occupied.
have we ever heard of a dust mite?
so i didn't think he was going to throw bart off.
i think he was just warning him actually.
and sometimes they turn into little catapults and things go up in the air.
but i would never do it to a living fly.
so what i decided to do is to pluck fine hair out of my face.
and it starts to dry very quickly.
so i have to be very quick.
so i have to be very very careful.
when the sunlight comes through the window you see these little fibers.
i remember one time i was doing it, and the window was open.
and there was a lady standing by the bus stop.
and she saw me walking around like this.
and then she looked at me.
and i bent it 'round, and made it into the chariot.
and the horse is made from nylon.
to get the symmetrical shape of the horse was very difficult, because i had to get the horse to rear up and look as though it was in some kind of action.
because i had to put the torch on the top.
the bottom of it is carved from a grain of sand, because i wanted to get a bit of the stone effect.
well, i can look at this one and i can be very proud of this, because that statue has always sort of kept an image in my head of, you know, the beginning of people coming to america.
so i wanted to have that little image.
and we all know that is the hulk.
they go in with their own friction.
it's something i wanted to do just to show how i could get the symmetrical shape.
now this is not a religious garment, nor is it a religious statement.
her answer was quite the contrary.
instead, she felt more free, more free because she could wear whatever she wanted under the abaya.
we are changing our culture from within, but at the same time we are reconnecting with our traditions.
we don't want to be all the same, but we want to respect each other and understand each other.
and this is what the leaders of this region are trying to do.
and i think a lot of people in this room, i can see a lot of you are in the same position as myself.
yes, we do have all the resources that we need in order to develop new cultural institutions, but what i think is more important is that we are very fortunate to have visionary leaders who understand that this can't happen from outside, it has to come from within.
you might be surprised to know that most people in the gulf who are leading these cultural initiatives happen to be women.
i want to ask you, why do you think this is?
i think that women in this part of the world realize that culture is an important component to connect people both locally and regionally.
they make a lot of money.
why else do greeks demand the return of the elgin marbles?
and why is there an uproar when a private collector tries to sell his collection to a foreign museum?
we don't want to have what there is in the west.
now this museum is just as important to us as the west.
for me it was a new discovery.
we have realized that recently more and more people are using the means of youtube and social networking to express their stories, share their photos and tell their own stories through their own voices.
today i am proud to say we have trained and educated over 66 qatari women filmmakers to edit, tell their own stories in their own voices.
one word and they get upset.
at the same time, we are inviting them to come and explore our part of the world.
i would like break the walls of ignorance between east and west -- no, not the soft option that we have discussed before, but rather the soft power that joseph nye has spoken about before.
now i don't pretend to have all the answers, but i know that me as an individual and we as a nation welcome this community of ideas worth spreading.
i welcome you on board for us to engage and discuss new ideas of how to bring people together through cultural initiatives and discussions.
the truth of the matter is otherwise.
for us human beings, and certainly for us as muslims, whose mission, and whose purpose in following the path of the prophet is to make ourselves as much like the prophet.
that is all well and good, but where do we go wrong, and what is the source of the lack of compassion in the world?
for the answer to this, we turn to our spiritual path.
and these doctors or these masters, these spiritual masters of the sufi tradition, refer to teachings and examples of our prophet that teach us where the source of our problems lies.
how can we go to a greater battle?"
the famous sufi master rumi, who is very well known to most of you, has a story in which he talks of a man who goes to the house of a friend, and he knocks on the door, and a voice answers, "who's there?"
and those of you who are employers know exactly what i mean.
and when i love my servant," god says, "i become the eyes by which he or she sees, the ears by which he or she listens, the hand by which he or she grasps, and the foot by which he or she walks, and the heart by which he or she understands."
it is this merging of our self with divinity that is the lesson and purpose of our spiritual path and all of our faith traditions.
the source of our being and the end of our journey, you are also the breaker of our hearts.
this is what i understand from my faith tradition, and this is what i understand from my studies of other faith traditions, and this is the common platform on which we must all stand, and when we stand on this platform as such, i am convinced that we can make a wonderful world.
for he foretold of a period when people shall transform their swords into plowshares and will not learn war or make war anymore.
my story actually began when i was four years old and my family moved to a new neighborhood in our hometown of savannah, georgia.
and i came back, and i wanted to turn around and get back to that street more quickly, so i decided to turn around in this big street that intersected our neighborhood, and wham!
i was hit by a passing sedan.
and i lay on the pavement stretching over that yellow line, and one of my neighbors came running over.
and to think that the tumor was in the same bone, in the same place in my body as the accident 38 years earlier -- it seemed like too much of a coincidence.
the next day i came to see him.
anyway -- so they had just turned three, and they came and they were doing this dance they had just made up where they were twirling faster and faster until they tumbled to the ground, laughing with all the glee in the world.
a few days later, i woke with an idea of how i might give them that voice.
i would reach out to six men from all parts of my life and ask them to be present in the passages of my daughters' lives.
they may not have their dad.
will you help be their dad?"
and i said to myself i would call this group of men "the council of dads."
so it turned out that starting a council of dads was a very efficient way to find out what my wife really thought of my friends.
so we decided that we needed a set of rules, and we came up with a number.
we thought our family would already be there.
so what happened was i wrote a letter to each of these men.
and rather than send it, i decided to read it to them in person.
so a few weeks after my diagnosis, we went up to vermont, and i decided to put jeff as the first person in the council of dads.
i kind of had forgotten there was a question at the heart of my letter.
and then i asked him a question, which i ended up asking to all the dads and ended up really encouraging me to write this story down in a book.
you can bend over and look at your reflection in the mirror and maybe run your finger and make a small ripple, or you can jump in and thrash around and see what it feels like, what it smells like."
only a hundred adults a year get one of these diseases.
and since we are in a medical room, i went through four and a half months of chemo.
and what he actually did was he de-vascularized it from my calf and re-vascularized it in my thigh and then connected it to the good parts of my knee and my hip.
and then he took out a third of my quadriceps muscle.
and my reward for surviving it was to go back for four more months of chemo.
and i remember a particular one night that, when you told that story of -- i don't know where you are dr.
and anybody who came to see me had to cover themselves in a mask and cover all of the extraneous parts of their body.
and one night i got a call from my mother-in-law that my daughters, at that time three and a half, were missing me and feeling my absence.
because the thought that came to my mind was that the feeling that i had was like a primal scream.
as i became less and less human -- and at this moment in my life, i was probably 30 pounds less than i am right now.
they were actually putting blood inside my body.
when my wife and i had kids, we thought it would be all-hands-on-deck.
and when people came to me, rather than being incredibly turned off by what they saw -- i was like a living ghost -- they were incredibly moved to talk about what was going on in their own lives.
and as i lifted my leg out of bed, she reached for my crutches and handed them to me.
and one of the profound things that happened was this act of actually connecting to all these people.
someone asked me if he cried when i asked him to be in the council of dads.
and this is what we wanted him to capture -- what it means to have setbacks and then aspirations.
and because walking was one of the first things i lost, i spent most of that year thinking about this most elemental of human acts.
and it was the custom of those flaneurs to show they were men of leisure by taking turtles for walks and letting the reptile set the pace.
take a walk with a turtle.
and this idea of pausing may be the single biggest lesson i took from my journey.
and every seven sets of seven years, the land gets an extra year of rest during which time all families are reunited and people surrounded with the ones they love.
as i looked at this list -- to me it was sort of like a psalm book of living -- i realized, we may have done it for our girls, but it really changed us.
and that is, the secret of the council of dads, is that my wife and i did this in an attempt to help our daughters, but it really changed us.
as i was going there, i was wondering, what would i say depending on what happened here.
and the epidemiologists here will tell you, that's half the number of people who get the disease in one year in the united states.
may you find a mud puddle to jump in someplace, or find a way to get over, around, or through any wall that stands between you and one of your dreams.
she urges us to start using it to change the world.
we want to know about health care.
and we want to learn other languages.
too often we just see a few slides, or a bit of film, but these beings have voices that mean something.
they can actually live longer than 60 in captivity, so we've only done 40 years in the wild so far.
they have a sense of humor, and these are the kind of things which traditionally have been thought of as human prerogatives.
but this teaches us a new respect -- and it's a new respect not only for the chimpanzees, i suggest, but some of the other amazing animals with whom we share this planet.
they're disappearing for the reasons that all of you in this room know only too well.
maybe i can get just a few dollars from this last tree which will keep us going a little bit longer, and then we'll pray that something will happen to save us from the inevitable end."
we can do it by talking to each other; we can do it through video; we can do it through the written word.
do you know we all have about 50 chemicals in our bodies we didn't have about 50 years ago?
there's little brochures all around outside, and if any of you have anything to do with children and care about their future, i beg that you pick up that brochure.
hundreds and thousands of young people around the world can break through, and can make this a better world.
and the most important message of roots and shoots is that every single individual makes a difference.
and these are projects to make the world around them a better place.
one project to show care and concern for your own human community.
we want to clear away the toxic soil from this area and have an organic garden.
we want to go and spend time with the old people and hear their stories and record their oral histories.
we want to go and work in a dog shelter.
we want to learn about animals.
and if anyone is interested to help us, we've got so many ideas but we need help -- we need help to create the right kind of system that will help these young people to communicate their excitement.
this is how you should do it."
we do not believe in violence.
know the facts, but see how they fit in the big picture.
are you going to come and drag me off?
and i believe that a group like this can have a very major impact, not just because you can share technology with us, but because so many of you have children.
and it's been so clear how much you all care about trying to make this world a better place.
now that we know what the problems are around the world, human brains like yours are rising to solve those problems.
we can destroy a river, and we can bring it back to life.
we can see a whole area desolated, and it can be brought back to bloom again, with time or a little help.
we are surrounded by the most amazing people who do things that seem to be absolutely impossible.
and just after that a woman brought me this little bell, and i want to end on this note.
this bell is made from metal from a defused landmine, from the killing fields of pol pot -- one of the most evil regimes in human history -- where people are now beginning to put their lives back together after the regime has crumbled.
is it out there with the politicians?
it's in your hands and my hands and those of our children.
we consider first that life has a body.
now this is necessary to distinguish the self from the environment.
and so these are the things we will try to do in the lab, make some experiments that have one or more of these characteristics of life.
so how do we do this?
you might think of this as kind of like a primitive cell.
and so what we do is, we start simple and we work our way up to living systems.
this is how we can start to make a protocell.
we use this idea called self-assembly.
but if you saw this protocell, you would not confuse this with something that was actually alive.
so i add some food source to the system.
it reconfigures itself and actually then is able to climb to the highest concentration of food in that system and stop there.
so not only do we have this system that has a body, it has a metabolism, it can use energy, it moves around.
so then we put these protocells together in a single experiment to see what they would do, and depending on the conditions, we have some protocells on the left that are moving around and it likes to touch the other structures in its environment.
on the other hand we have two moving protocells that like to circle each other, and they form a kind of a dance, a complex dance with each other.
and we just put these two together in the same system.
these are very dirty little protocells, as a matter of fact.
and not only that, but it helps us broaden our view of what life is and what possible life there could be out there -- life that could be very different from life that we find here on earth.
if we went to another planet and we thought there might be life there, how could we even recognize it as life?
that means the system cannot be dead, in a matter of fact.
80 to 90 percent of their time was spent on five things.
and i meet them at the university, i also have a few field offices that i set up in various places that provide an immersion in some of the environmental challenges we face.
we take the blood sample and do the blood work and hair work on the mice.
anything you do to improve your water quality or air quality, or to understand it or to change it, the benefits are enjoyed by anyone you share that water quality or air quality with.
many impatients are very concerned for water quality and air quality.
go down there and buy some of those health food bars, the ones you call bird food, and bring it here and scatter it around.
so there was several of these.
the birds were able to jump from one to the other.
and an early test which argument elicited cooperative behavior from the people below -- about a hundred to one decided that this was the argument that worked best on us.
you may not have known that you need to communicate with fish, but there is now a device for you to do so.
this is what it looks like.
they allow us to go where we want to when we want to.
and if you look at projections over the next 10 to 15 to 20 years, it looks like the world car park could grow to on the order of 1.1 billion vehicles.
we wanted something that was really affordable.
autonomy really set the vision for where we wanted to head.
and it can come from biofuels.
and the key to all of this is to make it affordable, to make it exciting, to get it on a pathway where there's a way to make money doing it.
and i tell them i sleep like a baby: i wake up crying every two hours.
i just want to ask one.
in oxford, perhaps we can use lewis carroll and look in the looking glass that is new york city to try and see our true selves, or perhaps pass through to another world.
and from these early experiences as a child i learned to love landscapes.
this experience and this training lead me to get a wonderful job with the wildlife conservation society, which works to save wildlife and wild places all over the world.
how does it work to make habitat for animals like me?"
for those of you who are from new york, this is 125th street under the west side highway.
and it's 10 feet long and three and a half feet wide.
so this is fun for finding where things are relative to the old topography.
but i had another idea about this map.
if we take away the streets, and if we take away the buildings, and if we take away the open spaces, then we could take this map.
the white areas on this map are the places protected from the winter winds.
so, we built a model that explains where those fields might have been.
and we might think of these as abandoned.
where do they get their food?
where do they get their water?
where do they get their shelter?
so we just started making a list.
as if these were the maps that we would need to predict where you would find the beaver.
and if you zoom in on it it looks like this.
and these would be the kind of trees that might have been there, and the flowers and the lichens and the mosses, the butterflies, the fish in the stream, the birds in the trees.
and perhaps a black bear walked by.
and then we took this data.
you can see this for yourself on our website.
you can zoom into any block on manhattan, and see what might have been there 400 years ago.
so we would take the landscape and we would build up the topography.
we can basically take a picture out of any window on manhattan and see what that landscape looked like 400 years ago.
this is the view from the east river, looking up murray hill at where the united nations is today.
and we can see this in the geography of the city today.
the place that you see here on the left side was interconnected.
it was based on this diversity.
we can compare these two and hold them in our minds at the same time, that they really are the same place, that there is no way that cities can escape from nature.
and i think this is what we're learning about building cities in the future.
and so many of the talks here at ted are about meaning, about bringing meaning to our lives in all kinds of different ways, through technology, through art, through science, so much so that i think we focus so much on that side of our lives, that we haven't given enough attention to the food and the water and the shelter, and what we need to raise the kids.
and those kids are growing up in a completely different way than their parents did, no matter where they live.
and they may not want to live exactly like us.
you know, so on the one hand we have the unthinkable; on the other hand we have the unimaginable.
and given that i have 13 minutes to do this, this is going to go kind of quick.
you can also start to change what you build.
you can start to know where things are.
when you know where things are, it becomes easier to share them.
so one great example is car-share clubs, which are really starting to take off in the u.s., have already taken off in many places in europe, and are a great example.
how we build things can change as well.
this is an example of bio-mimicry, which is something we're really starting to look a lot more for.
so we have a model in potential, an emerging model that we're looking for of how to take the cities most of us live in, and turn them into bright green cities.
so what do we need in order to make developing nation megacities into bright green megacities?
and this is one of the things that we are looking for everywhere.
so i rather like this picture here.
when you have free ability for people to freely work together and innovate, you get different kinds of solutions.
and those things lead to things like this.
and one of the things we're really, really interested in at worldchanging is the ways in which the south is re-identifying itself, and re-categorizing itself in ways that have less and less to do with most of us in this room.
i would keep your eye on this fellow.
another example of this sort of second superpower thing is the rise of these games that are what we call "serious play."
we get so little news about the developing world that we often forget that there are literally millions of people out there struggling to change things to be fairer, freer, more democratic, less corrupt.
and the same thing is true for people who are in absolute crisis.
how do we help people like that?
does anyone know what this is?
and i think that we will.
all that the human mind has accomplished is but the dream before the awakening."
i hope that that turns out to be true.
the people in this room have given me more confidence than ever that it will.
they want to raise the cost of copyright compliance to the point where people simply get out of the business of offering it as a capability to amateurs.
they want to take them out of the domain name system.
the 20th century was a great time to be a media company, because the thing you really had on your side was scarcity.
if you were making a tv show, it didn't have to be better than all other tv shows ever made; it only had to be better than the two other shows that were on at the same time -- which is a very low threshold of competitive difficulty.
we do like to consume, but every time one of these new tools came along, it turned out we also like to produce and we like to share.
if you make lots and lots of high quality copies and you sell them, that's not okay.
so they went for plan b.
and the main reason it hasn't worked is the internet has turned out to be far more popular and far more powerful than anyone imagined.
we are in a world where most american citizens over the age of 12 share things with each other online.
you need to take them out of search engines, you need to take them out of online directories, you need to take them out of user lists.
because the whole business of actually suggesting that someone is breaking the law and then gathering evidence and proving that, that turns out to be really inconvenient.
and what they want is not to have to do that.
they just want the sharing to go away.
they're the next turn of this particular screw, which has been going on 20 years now.
in the meantime, the hard thing to do is to be ready.
the whole world was laid out for me.
and then i thought out of curiosity i'd like to go and live and work and just see what a village is like.
the whole world is laid out for you, the best jobs are laid out for you, and you want to go and work in a village?
and i wanted to give something back in my own way."
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college.
i went to this village for the first time.
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college."
so the elders gave me some very sound and profound advice.
you have to work with your hands.
you have to show that you have a skill that you can offer to the community and provide a service to the community.
and we thought that these people should come into the mainstream and show that the knowledge and skills that they have is universal.
that is where we want you to try crazy ideas.
you don't need a paper to hang on the wall to show that you are an engineer.
i was in a bit of a spot.
this is what it looks like today.
the men should clear out because we don't want to share this technology with the men.
all the power comes from the sun.
and everything works off the sun for the next 25 years.
he knows more about solar than anyone i know anywhere in the world guaranteed.
and we have 60 meals twice a day of solar cooking.
if we have four years of drought, we still have water on the campus, because we collect rainwater.
so we thought of starting a school at night for the children.
and what do we teach in these schools?
this is what we teach in the night schools.
every five years we have an election.
first time ever going out of her village.
because they want to leave the village and go to a city, looking for a job.
they don't even go out of their rooms, and you want to take them to india."
so i took the husbands along.
of course, the women were much more intelligent than the men.
those three women have trained 27 more women and solar-electrified 100 villages in afghanistan.
but their body language is great.
i knew which woman i would like to take.
i like the way she speaks."
she went like a grandmother and came back like a tiger.
she walked out of the plane and spoke to the whole press as if she was a veteran.
this is actually a light emitter.
we hope that all of you will come to see the allosphere.
when you have 21 minutes to speak, two million years seems like a really long time.
what is it about a big brain that nature was so eager for every one of us to have one?
and one of the main reasons our brain got so big is because it got a new part, called the "frontal lobe."
human beings have this marvelous adaptation that they can actually have experiences in their heads before they try them out in real life.
this is a trick that none of our ancestors could do, and that no other animal can do quite like we can.
here's two different futures that i invite you to contemplate, and you can try to simulate them and tell me which one you think you might prefer.
and the other is becoming paraplegic.
for the simulator to make you believe that different outcomes are more different than in fact they really are.
what does he have to say all these years later about it?
what other way would there be to be better off?
and what did he have to say about his experience?
so he went to find them.
there's something important to be learned from these people, and it is the secret of happiness.
you really didn't have that much in common with her, and you figured that out just about the time she threw the engagement ring in your face."
natural happiness is what we get when we get what we wanted, and synthetic happiness is what we make when we don't get what we wanted.
why do we have that belief?
what kind of economic engine would keep churning if we believed that not getting what we want could make us just as happy as getting it?
i want to suggest to you that synthetic happiness is every bit as real and enduring as the kind of happiness you stumble upon when you get exactly what you were aiming for.
we're going to give you one as your prize to take home.
we happen to have number three and number four," we tell the subject.
this is the result that has been replicated over and over again.
would you like to see it again?
and we asked these patients to rank them from the one they liked the most to the one they liked the least.
we then gave them the choice between number three and number four.
i could use a new print.
we gathered up our materials and we went out of the room, and counted to a half hour.
all i want you to do is rank these for me from the one you like the most to the one you like the least."
it turns out that freedom -- the ability to make up your mind and change your mind -- is the friend of natural happiness, because it allows you to choose among all those delicious futures and find the one that you would most enjoy.
look at the quality of the free paper compared to your lousy regular paper!
only a fool or a liar would say that they look the same!"
now that you mention it, it does seem a little silkier!"
now what i want to show you is that people don't know this about themselves, and not knowing this can work to our supreme disadvantage.
so you have to give me one.
you have to make a choice.
you get to keep one, and i get to keep one."
you will never see it again."
now, half of the students in each of these conditions are asked to make predictions about how much they're going to come to like the picture that they keep and the picture they leave behind.
other students are just sent back to their little dorm rooms and they are measured over the next three to six days on their liking, satisfaction with the pictures.
and look at what we find.
they think they're going to maybe come to like the picture they chose a little more than the one they left behind, but these are not statistically significant differences.
maybe i left the good one?"
we could do it so that when you take the two pictures, you'd have four days to change your mind, or we're doing another course where you take the two pictures and you make up your mind right away and you can never change it.
which course would you like to be in?"
66 percent of the students choose to be in the course in which they will ultimately be deeply dissatisfied with the picture.
is there really nothing good or bad?
we should have preferences that lead us into one future over another.
when our ambition is bounded, it leads us to work joyfully.
it had to be dug out.
at night you can see what happened in a second; in daytime, we call them land sharks.
sometimes they just explode before your eyes or come down supersonic.
he was born there in 1924.
have you been watching the commercials?
because every one of us has this desire, for once -- just once -- to tell our story and have it heard.
there are stories you tell from stages.
there's stories that you may tell in a small group of people with some good wine.
and there's stories you tell late at night to a friend, maybe once in your life.
and then there are stories that we whisper into a stygian darkness.
but this story only happened a few years ago.
and i was calling about how to make ajiaco.
"ma'am, did you know that was a light you just ran?"
and this is the woman that wants me to come on a saturday morning when i have a lot to do, but it doesn't take long because cuban guilt is a weighty thing.
and so we left my father fast asleep, because i knew he'd kill me if i let her go by herself, and we get in the car.
how long have you been driving?"
what is wrong with his underwear?"
i grew up with this woman.
i don't know what part of the country you live in.
i think we all secretly love stories.
i put the car in park.
she jumped out of that car."
that was one of her smaller ideas.
here are some ways that we can make some dramatic changes.
how does it feel to be a person using a zipcar?
it means that i pay only for what i need.
it means that i can choose a car exactly for that particular trip.
it's like the car that you always wanted that your mom said that you couldn't have.
i get all the good stuff and none of the bad.
so, how is it that people went from the 12,000 miles a year to 500 miles?
and the last point i want to make is zipcar would never be possible without technology.
and for me, as a service provider, i would never be able to provide you a car for an hour if the transaction cost was anything.
and so when i think about the future, people will be thinking that sharing the ride with someone is this incredibly great social event out of their day.
why would you ever want to go by yourself in your own car?
how did you go food shopping?
where can i go today and who can i do it with?
those are the types of things that you will look at and feel.
and it's the cost of driving that's making people want to be able to do this.
why do we travel too much?
we need to put this better market feedback.
when are we going to do it?
are we going to wait 10 to 15 years for this to happen or are we going to finally have this political will to make it happen in the next two years?
you can look at the terminal and be able to see precisely where your bus is on the street and when it's coming, and you can buy your tickets in real time.
and why is this going to happen?
these things are going to happen.
maybe we should use a good one.
when are we going to do it?
maybe we shouldn't wait for the 10 or 15 years for this to happen.
imagine what happens when the cost of getting information from anywhere to anywhere is close to zero.
and we can be doing it if we could just get over the fact that this little slice of things is going to be for free.
and they got here in the late 1960s.
they saw their first dentist, they ate their first hamburger, and they had their first kids.
we actually saw seals out of our car window, and we pulled over to take a quick picture of them and then blocked them with our giant heads.
i was going through a lot of personal problems at the time.
one day my wife came home from work and summoned the courage, through a lot of tears, to have a very honest conversation.
and it was a really heavy time.
and as these dark clouds were circling me, and i was finding it really, really difficult to think of anything good, i said to myself that i really needed a way to focus on the positive somehow.
and slowly over time, i started putting myself in a better mood.
and then i got excited when it started getting tens of hits, and then i started getting excited when it started getting dozens and then hundreds and then thousands and then millions.
it started getting bigger and bigger and bigger.
but look, i said i wanted to do three things with you today.
i said i wanted to tell you the awesome story, i wanted to share with you the three as of awesome, and i wanted to leave you with a closing thought.
but lately i have had the opportunity to take a step back and ask myself: "what is it over the last few years that helped me grow my website, but also grow myself?"
having a great attitude is about choosing option number two, and choosing, no matter how difficult it is, no matter what pain hits you, choosing to move forward and move on and take baby steps into the future.
i love hanging out with three year-olds.
i love the way that they see the world, because they're seeing the world for the first time.
i love the way that they see the world, because they're seeing the world for the first time.
because you all used to be three years old.
so there was a time when it was your first time ever hitting a string of green lights on the way home from work.
you meet people that you like talking to.
and you end you end up following your heart and feeling very fulfilled.
so those are the three a's.
for the closing thought, i want to take you all the way back to my parents coming to canada.
i don't know what it would feel like coming to a new country when you're in your mid-20s.
and i just wanted to say thank you to you guys.
when i was growing up, my dad used to love telling the story of his first day in canada.
and this non-profit group had a big welcoming lunch for all the new immigrants to canada.
and my dad says he got off the plane and he went to this lunch and there was this huge spread.
i was eating olives with pie.
i just couldn't believe how many things you can get here."
there are so many things to be happy about.
you can sleep in clean sheets.
life is so great that we only get such a short time to experience and enjoy all those tiny little moments that make it so sweet.
you will never be as young as you are right now.
and that's why i believe that if you live your life with a great attitude, choosing to move forward and move on whenever life deals you a blow, living with a sense of awareness of the world around you, embracing your inner three year-old and seeing the tiny joys that make life so sweet and being authentic to yourself, being you and being cool with that, letting your heart lead you and putting yourself in experiences that satisfy you, then i think you'll live a life that is rich and is satisfying, and i think you'll live a life that is truly awesome.
in the face of america's worst destruction people are building again.
we finished ps 234, and had dinner with a small group.
and i sat in on several meetings.
and the fact is that there were immediate wounds and needs that needed to be filled, and there was talk about inclusion and wanting it to be an inclusive process.
and then everyone was up on the roof, so i ran up there.
and it was amazing how much harder it was to believe in real life than it was on tv.
there was something about the comfort of the filter and how much information was between us and the experience.
at the same time the city had this need.
they were looking for a solution to deal with 30 or 40 thousand people a day who were going down there, that had nowhere to go.
and there was no way to deal with the traffic around the site.
so dealing with it is just an immediate master plan.
there was a way -- there had to be a way -- to get people to move around the site.
so the first thing we had to do was find a way to get this -- we had to work with the families of the victims, through the city, to make sure that they knew this was happening.
and we also had to be as under the radar screen as we could be in new york, because the key was not raising a lot of objection and sort of working as quietly as possible.
we came up with the idea of setting up a foundation, mainly because when we found a contractor who would build this, he would not agree to do this, even if we would pay him the money.
there needed to be a foundation in place.
and i think this was the 21st, and we knew this had to be built and up by the 28th.
there was no sense of the fact that this is next to saint paul -- that this is really a place that needs to be kind of dignified, and a place to reflect and remember.
and i've got to say that we spent a lot of time in putting this together, watching the crowds that gathered at saint paul -- which is just to the right -- and moving around the site.
and i live down there, so we spent a lot of time looking at the need.
and i think people were amazed at two things -- i think they were amazed at the destruction, but i think there was a sense of disbelief about the heroics of new yorkers that i found very moving.
we'd have to go back to the beginning to do this."
and i convinced him that we should leave the room with the agreement to build it as designed.
so we didn't know what to do, but we decided to cast a very wide net.
we knew that one way or another this was going to happen.
and we just felt it had to happen.
it was important that this not be categorized as a memorial.
that this was a place for people to reflect, to remember -- a kind of quiet place.
one of the other things is this is designed to be moveable.
this is clearly not a work for the ages.
did that require, as an architect, a new way of thinking about what you were doing?
i think what we were most interested in was promoting a kind of dialogue that we felt may not have been happening enough in this city, about what's really happening there.
and i think regardless of what the position is about how this sacred piece of land is to be used, having it come out of actually seeing it in a real encounter, i think makes it a more powerful dialogue.
dr: and it also felt a little bit like a kind of competition of ideas, where i think the focus of ideas should be on master planning and uses.
and why do we live in places where such dissimilar people collide up against us each day?
this small foundation we put together is looking for other ways to help.
so i thought that would be good to end with.
and also the complexity and length of time they really take to do.
the scaffolding you can see built up over the street is de-mountable.
and we were thrilled to be able to show it here.
they were not the only ones.
so what has this got to do with this?
this was at a time that treatment actually existed in rich countries.
clearly this led to patent wars breaking out all over the globe.
never has this number been so high, but actually this is good news, because what it means is people stop dying.
they also stop passing on the virus.
what that means is we have the tools to break the back of this epidemic.
they were forced to do so.
his son will soon be 14 years old.
and this is no longer fantasy.
this has never been done before.
this has never been seen before.
so i just want to tell you my story.
i spend a lot of time teaching adults how to use visual language and doodling in the workplace.
but that does contribute to people not wanting to share their doodles.
and here is the real deal.
and i think that is incredible.
and i will go you one further.
so you can get kind of a feel for this.
he wants to learn how to ride a unicycle.
because this is what i do.
but how about the kid on the left, or the athlete that leaves the field of play?
how do we know if he or she has sustained a concussion?
so i may have forgotten to mention that my son is an only child.
so it's going to be really important that he be able to drive me around some day.
so how do we guarantee the safety of our kids?
how can we 100 percent guarantee the safety of our kids?
but i do know there are three things you can do.
so before i start, i want to talk about a little anecdote, a little story about a man i met once in mumbai.
he runs a little shop in one of the back streets of mumbai.
you can hand over a phone this morning and you can go pick it up after lunch, and it was quite incredible.
you've got to try it on your own to believe it.
can we make a little product or a service out of it?"
so one of the first things we did is this thing called a multimedia platform.
we call it a lunch box.
they are kids who scream at the top of their voices, and you really have to get above that.
it might take a few days to get there, but at least it gets there in high definition and in a reliable quality.
so if there was something that she could do, that would be amazing.
so the thing about this is that if the pointer, unfortunately, had pointed to the red spot, we would have to rush you to a hospital.
david pogue on the music wars
and i was taking care of people who were dying and their families in the south side of chicago.
and i was observing what happened to people and their families over the course of their terminal illness.
and i had gone to take care of one particular patient, a woman who was dying of dementia.
and i started to see the world in a whole new way, like pairs of people connected to each other.
and then i realized that these individuals would be connected into foursomes with other pairs of people nearby.
so i started to see the world in a completely new way and i became obsessed with this.
a kind of induction, a kind of spread from person to person.
and here, the idea is not that my weight gain is causing your weight gain, nor that i preferentially form a tie with you because you and i share the same body size, but rather that we share a common exposure to something, like a health club that makes us both lose weight at the same time.
now, i want to be very clear: we do not think our work should or could justify prejudice against people of one or another body size at all.
was weight gain in one person actually spreading to weight gain in another person?
lots of people are doing things at the same time.
and i'm about to show you a 30 second video animation that took me and james five years of our lives to do.
every tie between them is a relationship.
why do we show our emotions?
and not only do we show them, but others can read them.
and this is one of the first images we made to study this phenomenon.
and whether you become happy or not depends in part on whether you occupy a happy patch.
but they never look like this.
why do they not look like this?
if you look here at the dots, compare node b in the upper left to node d in the far right; b has four friends coming out from him and d has six friends coming out from him.
would you rather be c or d?
and now who would you rather be if a juicy piece of gossip -- not about you -- was spreading through the network?
we know that some people are born shy and some are born gregarious.
whether your friends know each other has not just to do with their genes, but with yours.
and we think the reason for this is that some people like to introduce their friends to each other -- you know who you are -- and others of you keep them apart and don't introduce your friends to each other.
and finally, we even found that 30 percent of the variation in whether or not people are in the middle or on the edge of the network can also be attributed to their genes.
so whether you find yourself in the middle or on the edge is also partially heritable.
how does this help us understand?
how does this help us figure out some of the problems that are affecting us these days?
so think about these two common objects.
it is the ties between people that makes the whole greater than the sum of its parts.
and what i think the world needs now is more connections.
you hear about it all the time.
you read about it in your newspapers.
sometimes i'm concerned that we hear about it so much that we've come to accept longer lives with a kind of a complacency, even ease.
because what that means is that for the first time in the history of the species, the majority of babies born in the developed world are having the opportunity to grow old.
study after study is coming to the same conclusion.
we've asked whether it may be that the current generations of older people are and always have been the greatest generations.
that is that younger people today may not typically experience these improvements as they grow older.
and we studied whether and how their emotional experiences changed as they grew older.
how sad are you right now?
-- so that we could get a sense of the kinds of emotions and feelings they were having in their day-to-day lives.
but at no point does it return to the levels we see in early adulthood.
by 2015, there will be more people in the united states over the age of 60 than under 15.
they could fly in the air.
they could spin on their heads for 80 times in a row.
i grew up in a musical family.
dance has never had a better friend than technology.
and this is happening every day.
i got my name just because i was so young.
i was young when i started.
i was younger than a lot of the people i was dancing with.
and you let it go, and then right when you see the tail, you grab it by the tail, then you bring it back in.
many of you may have heard of the lakota, or at least the larger group of tribes called the sioux.
the lakota are one of many tribes that were moved off their land to prisoner of war camps now called reservations.
and if we look at our lives, we have indeed taken the best part of the meat.
so let's look today at a set of photographs of a people who lost so that we could gain, and know that when you see these people's faces that these are not just images of the lakota; they stand for all indigenous people.
on this piece of paper is the history the way i learned it from my lakota friends and family.
the government also promises land and hunting rights in the surrounding states.
the treaty seemed to be a complete victory for red cloud and the sioux.
he was later killed while in custody.
1877 is also the year we found a way to get around the fort laramie treaties.
when i look back now from this high hill of my old age, i can still see the butchered women and children lying heaped and scattered all along the crooked gulch as plain as when i saw them with eyes still young.
and i can see that something else died there in the bloody mud and was buried in the blizzard: a people's dream died there, and it was a beautiful dream."
they were tired of ghost dances.
and they were tired of all the inconveniences of the sioux.
so they brought out their cannons.
this is how we came to own these united states.
these are the bones left after the best meat has been taken.
a long time ago, a series of events was set in motion by a people who look like me, by wasichu, eager to take the land and the water and the gold in the hills.
what is the connection between these images of suffering and the history that i just read to you?
and how much of this history do you need to own, even?
is any of this your responsibility today?
i have been told that there must be something we can do.
there must be some call to action.
so where does that leave us?
and this is something that changes your understanding of the world around you, and teaches you that you're very wrong about something that you really believed firmly in.
one of the big reasons this happened was because of diarrhea.
if you look in areas where these salts are completely available, the price is low or zero, these deaths still continue abated.
but in this case we cracked it, but a big part of the problem still remains.
you get it, either in pill form or you get it as an injection; you have to take it every day to maintain your blood sugar levels.
how do they answer this question?
think about what that means for a second.
i think there is something very profoundly right in what these women are doing.
but it makes a whole lot of sense at some deep level.
and if you want to understand how it's more complex let me start with something kind of interesting.
i just want you to name the color of the object.
i want you to do it fast, and say it out loud with me, and do it quickly.
now the next ones i want you to do quickly and say it out loud.
what is all this telling us?
we do well on crash tests."
which one of these people has done more for the environment?
turns out, go home and do the math, the nine to 11 is a bigger change.
that person has saved more gallons.
if we want to encourage change of behavior, gallons per mile would have far more effectiveness.
boxes fall out of the truck.
this is a battle we all fight every day, along with trying to get to the gym.
maybe the last mile problem really should be thought of as the last mile opportunity.
i think this tells us there is an opportunity.
but you know what we do on the last mile?
it's kind of the model that has worked in other contexts.
at the very end of it, i showed a list under that title.
"drugs are fun in the beginning but become a drag later on."
we do them for our clients.
and a friend of mine in austria felt so sorry for me that he talked the largest casino owner in linz into letting us wrap his building.
we had a show that just came down last week in new york.
and i do go often into the diary and check if i wanted to change something about the situation.
and the very last one is a billboard.
this is our roof in new york, the roof of the studio.
we let that lie around in the sun.
but you have to have the right tools.
so my wonderful student sam and i decided to look at the most tangible thing we could think of: play-doh.
and so we spent a summer looking at different play-doh recipes.
but the really cool thing about them is when we put them together.
you see that really salty play-doh?
and so i want to do a little demo for you.
if i place that between, now all the dough is touching, but if i stick that light back in, i have light.
what happens if i put in lots of lights and then add a motor?
so this is all in your home kitchen.
and it's been really fun since we put them up to see where these have gone.
but i will first teach you a method, how you can do it without moving the wrist, and then the shortcut.
and you can sit over there.
so a different person all the time, so not the same person can answer.
so here you see the contrast when i treat the cards.
but also the other hand is good, if all the other guys have good hands too.
so the hand that looks so good from the beginning, number three, at the end was actually the lowest hand.
if you pass the left brain, you have to take care of logic and common sense.
i have a little pad to make it a little softer.
then you have to push it down again.
but if you just look and talk in another language ...
i think i do it the same way.
we can take some over there later.
i think we save five of clubs.
but you can relax, because it takes half an hour before it works, so you have plenty of time to see my whole performance.
i try to do this right here.
i think we have it now.
i will try to find the diamonds, but i will do it the hard way.
i think i will do it ...
you just got to -- this is a request from the lady in the back.
this is maybe a little tough.
you see that in the screen?
they were sent down to find if there was any opportunity for selling shoes, and they wrote telegrams back to manchester.
and there are some of us who think you ain't seen nothing yet.
one is i want to remind you of what a seven-year-old child sounds like when he plays the piano.
maybe you have this child at home.
i see some of you recognize this child.
you can see it by looking at my head.
it can be the other buttock.
and i moved his body like that, while he was playing.
and then i got a letter from this gentleman.
now, the other thing i wanted to do is to tell you about you.
and your children are playing instruments.
now, you notice that there is not the slightest doubt in my mind that this is going to work if you look at my face, right?
some of you will know it.
do you know what i think probably happened in this room?
and then you feel even worse.
but has it ever occurred to you that the reason you feel sleepy in classical music is not because of you, but because of us?
if i'd done this with my head you certainly would have thought it.
and the job of the c is to make the b sad.
if they want sad music, they just play those two notes.
you remember, he keeps on going up to his uncle and almost killing him.
and then he backs away, and he goes up to him again and almost kills him.
because we all know where home is.
so this is a piece which goes from away to home.
because for me, to join the b to the e, i have to stop thinking about every single note along the way, and start thinking about the long, long line from b to e.
this is about the long line.
and i've one last request before i play this piece all the way through.
bring that person into your mind, and at the same time follow the line all the way from b to e, and you'll hear everything that chopin had to say.
and i did exactly what i did with you, and i told them and explained them and the whole thing.
but i tell you what happened to me.
but last night, when you played that piece, he was the one i was thinking about.
and you know, it felt really good to cry for my brother."
so i made up my mind at that moment that classical music is for everybody.
if only we could move it to four percent, our problems would be over.
and that changed everything for me.
and of course, i wanted to know whether i was doing that.
and you know how you find out?
if the eyes are not shining, you get to ask a question.
and i say, it's appropriate for us to ask the question, who are we being as we go back out into the world?
so now, i have one last thought, which is that it really makes a difference what we say -- the words that come out of our mouth.
" the way an elder sister might speak to a younger brother.
unfortunately, it was the last thing she ever said to him, because she never saw him again.
and so when she came out of auschwitz, she made a vow.
and the vow was, i will never say anything that couldn't stand as the last thing i ever say."
dan pallotta: the way we think about charity is dead wrong
sometimes i tell people i have triplets.
but before i do that, i want to ask if we even believe that the nonprofit sector has any serious role to play in changing the world.
a lot of people say now that business will lift up the developing economies, and social business will take care of the rest.
but it always leaves behind that 10 percent or more that is most disadvantaged or unlucky.
i sit on the board of a center for the developmentally disabled, and these people want laughter and compassion and they want love.
it is the market for all those people for whom there is no other market coming.
we have a visceral reaction to the idea that anyone would make very much money helping other people.
and we think of this as our system of ethics, but what we don't realize is that this system has a powerful side effect, which is, it gives a really stark, mutually exclusive choice between doing very well for yourself and your family or doing good for the world to the brightest minds coming out of our best universities, and sends tens of thousands of people who could make a huge difference in the nonprofit sector marching every year directly into the for-profit sector because they're not willing to make that kind of lifelong economic sacrifice.
i want it go to the needy."
they raised more money more quickly for these causes than any events in history, all based on the idea that people are weary of being asked to do the least they can possibly do.
but they have to be asked.
do you know how many people we would have gotten if we put up flyers in the laundromat?
and the last area is profit itself.
so why do we think this way?
the puritans came here for religious reasons, or so they said, but they also came here because they wanted to make a lot of money.
they were taught that self-interest was a raging sea that was a sure path to eternal damnation.
making all this money will get you sent directly to hell.
what were they to do about this?
there are a lot of problems with this question.
now which pie would we prefer, and which pie do we think people who are hungry would prefer?
we want it to read that we changed the world, and that part of the way we did that was by changing the way we think about these things.
who cares what the overhead is if these problems are actually getting solved?
so it allows it to roll.
and i thought up a lot of ideas.
representing that eight and a half minutes that it takes light and gravity to connect the two.
this one is about the moon and then the distance to the earth, in proportion also.
i was thinking that the sun is kind of the ultimate alchemist.
and so i placed one more element of each one of them.
this is a clock i designed.
and i had a lot of -- always interested in the concept of a crystal ball.
this has evolved over the years in a lot of different iterations.
so we have a physical plan of how to make this actually happen.
this is the control room inside of the ship.
the idea of it is to make a kind of a traveling show.
and then at night the idea is that it would be used as kind of a rave situation, where the people could cut loose, and the music and the lights, and everything.
it would also be able to be an open code, so people could interact with it.
i want to make a case.
some of you might have seen this before.
i bring you into a room.
you look at that box and you see it only as a receptacle for the tacks.
this shows the power of incentives.
how quickly you can solve this problem?"
to the second group he offered rewards.
now this is several years ago.
three and a half minutes longer.
now this makes no sense right?
let me show you what i mean.
you want to be looking around.
let me tell you why this is so important.
are the problems that you face, or even the problems we've been talking about here, are those kinds of problems -- do they have a clear set of rules, and a single solution?
let me give you an example of what i mean.
if you do really well you get the large reward, on down.
people offered the medium level of rewards did no better than people offered the small rewards.
we need a whole new approach.
mastery: the desire to get better and better at something that matters.
purpose: the yearning to do what we do in the service of something larger than ourselves.
i want to talk today only about autonomy.
let me give you some examples.
it looks like less than half.
a few times a year they tell their engineers, "go for the next 24 hours and work on anything you want, as long as it's not part of your regular job.
they show up when they want.
they just have to get their work done.
do it because you like to do it.
and i go on the podium.
and in front of all that noise, you do a very small gesture.
if it were that, i would just save you the talk, and teach you the gesture.
so you could go out to the world and do this thing in whatever company or whatever you want, and you have perfect harmony.
and then speak a little bit about how it comes about.
and i think the happiness, the important thing is this happiness does not come from only his own story and his joy of the music.
and all those stories are being heard at the same time.
this is the true experience of a live concert.
can we have a little demonstration?
if you do it without me i feel even more redundant than i already feel.
he does something like this ...
and you know what happened to muti?
when he was a young man of about 30, he wrote what he called "the ten commandments for conductors."
the first one was: if you sweat by the end of the concert it means that you must have done something wrong.
so, the whole idea is really to let it happen by itself.
you have to play by the book.
did you see this kind of movement?
and then they look at each other.
and when karajan is asked about it he actually says, "yes, the worst damage i can do to my orchestra is to give them a clear instruction.
because that would prevent the ensemble, the listening to each other that is needed for an orchestra."
meaning that you know you have no authority to change anything.
can we do it in another way?
but how does it really work together if it doesn't give them instructions?
you have the plan in your head.
but here and there and that.
this is very exciting for those players.
but of course it's not only about motivation and giving them a lot of physical energy.
you also have to be very professional.
and look again at this kleiber.
again you see the beautiful body language.
and now there is a trumpet player who does something not exactly the way it should be done.
and now the third time for the same player.
i have a short notice to give you."
but authority is not enough to make people your partners.
see what you can pick up from this.
and the second thing is it's about actually being in control, but in a very special way.
because the meaning of the music is pain.
but not in a way that you want to stop.
but you can see the music on his face.
now, if you are doing all the things we talked about, together, and maybe some others, you can get to this wonderful point of doing without doing.
as a culture, we tell ourselves lots of stories about the future, and where we might move forward from this point.
some of those stories are that somebody is just going to sort everything out for us.
other stories are that everything is on the verge of unraveling.
but i want to tell you a different story here today.
and then i came into contact with a way of looking at things which actually changed that profoundly.
if you could help me with that it would be fantastic.
this is a liter of oil.
there is also the fact that the amount of energy that we get back from the oil that we discover is falling.
but the thinking that we have to come up with has to be based on a realistic assessment of where we are.
but i'm always very interested to think about what might the stories be that the generations further down the slope from us are going to tell about us.
stories like the magic porridge pot, where you had a pot where if you knew the magic words, this pot would just make as much food as you liked, without you having to do any work, provided you could remember the other magic word to stop it making porridge.
and what are the stories that we tell ourselves now, as we look forward about where we're going to go.
and i would argue that there are four.
there is the idea of business as usual, that the future will be like the present, just more of it.
there is the idea of hitting the wall, that actually somehow everything is so fragile that it might just all unravel and collapse.
but we also live in a world with very real constraints and demands.
and it is something which has several characteristics.
it tries to create a sense that this is a historic opportunity to do something really extraordinary.
people have a huge amount of fun doing this, reconnecting with other people as they do it.
one of the things that underpins it is this idea of resilience.
so basically, you have a group of people who are excited by the idea.
they start to run an awareness-raising program looking at how this might actually work in the town.
so it started out with some work i was involved in in ireland, where i was teaching, and has since spread.
and there are thousands of others who are at what we call the mulling stage.
and actually a lot of them are doing huge amounts of stuff.
but what do they actually do?
but all of those things are going to be much easier if we have communities that are vibrant and coming up with ideas and leading from the front, making unelectable policies electable, over the next 5 to 10 years.
and also starting to play around with the idea of alternative currencies.
and we see it all over the place as well now.
but the key to transition is thinking not that we have to change everything now, but that things are already inevitably changing, and what we need to do is to work creatively with that, based on asking the right questions.
i think i'd like to just return at the end to the idea of stories.
and actually the stories that we tell ourselves, we have a huge dearth of stories about how to move forward creatively from here.
and one of the key things that transition does is to pull those stories out of what people are doing.
but let us honor what it has bought us, and move forward from this point.
and by loving and leaving all that oil has done for us, and that the oil age has done for us, we are able to then begin the creation of a world which is more resilient, more nourishing, and in which, we find ourselves fitter, more skilled and more connected to each other.
well what are we taking in?
most of it is because of ways that the liabilities are building up and the trends, and that creates a huge challenge.
now how did we get here?
how could you have a problem like this?
so you get a big squeeze.
what were those things that allowed us to hide this?
is anyone paying attention to some of the things these guys do?
it really is this young versus the old to some degree.
it's also really a problem for where we need to go.
in a situation where you have growth, you put the new money into this.
and the numbers are used to make decisions.
so what do we need to do?
we can get some things out on the internet.
i'm going to use my website to put up some things that will give the basic picture.
it should be more like private accounting.
in fact, the week afterwards, some tax cuts were done that made the situation even worse than their assumptions.
but we have to draw those people in, because this is about education.
in doing so he outlines the overwhelming evidence that change is happening and why that makes him deeply worried about the future.
and what would you do if you knew what i know?
i was lucky to grow up at a time when it was not difficult for the child of a tenant farmer to make his way to the state university.
all of these impacts have since either happened or are now well under way.
there will be stronger storms and greater flooding.
so i decided to go back to strictly doing science and leave the communication to others.
most of the things mentioned in our 1981 paper were facts.
so i decided to give a public talk criticizing the lack of an appropriate energy policy.
where you are sitting now would be under water.
the important point is that we will have started a process that is out of humanity's control.
here at age two and a half years, he thinks he can protect his two and a half-day-old little sister.
it would be immoral to leave these young people with a climate system spiraling out of control.
so now you know what i know that is moving me to sound this alarm.
we owe it to our children and grandchildren.
he talks us through his next stunt: the highest jump ever attempted, from the very edge of space.
or perhaps not quite on earth.
more about that a bit later on.
during that time, health and safety has become everything about my job.
what safety they had was very scant.
he worked with john wayne and most of those old punch-ups you see in the westerns.
spring off the thing and fly through the air, and hopefully you make it look good.
this thing is called an air ram.
being run over is never easy.
rolling a car over is another area where we use technology.
and people are looking like this ...
only one person had ever done it before.
even then, i caught seven g and lost a bit of consciousness on the way in.
they used to use cardboard boxes years ago and we still use them.
completely in the safety of a studio, and yet with the green screen we can have some moving image that a skydiver took, and put in the sky moving and the clouds whizzing by.
and i'd just like to show you a little footage of what he did back then.
and just how brave he was in 1960, bear in mind.
you can clearly see the curvature of the earth at that kind of altitude.
i spoke with him on the phone a few months ago.
it took me a while; it took me years to find the right balloon team to build the balloon that would do this job.
and what must that feel like?
i did quite a lot of research.
this is what the view is going to be like at 90,000 feet for me.
trying to find a space suit to do this has led me to an area of technology that i never really expected when i set about doing this.
i will use it for all the jumps.
and i hope that you will agree with me, it is the greatest stunt on earth.
thank you very much for your time.
no idea how this may play out.
and you say you work in education, you can see the blood run from their face.
my one night out all week."
i have a big interest in education, and i think we all do.
just seeing what she could do.
what you have there is a person of extraordinary dedication who found a talent.
so i want to talk about education and i want to talk about creativity.
my contention is that creativity now is as important in education as literacy, and we should treat it with the same status.
i heard a great story recently -- i love telling it -- of a little girl who was in a drawing lesson.
she was six and she was at the back, drawing, and the teacher said this little girl hardly ever paid attention, and in this drawing lesson she did.
we considered this to be one of the lead parts.
he didn't have to speak, but you know the bit where the three kings come in.
what these things have in common is that kids will take a chance.
now, i don't mean to say that being wrong is the same thing as being creative.
the problem is to remain an artist as we grow up.
are you struck by a new thought?
and we were rather pleased about that, frankly, because she was the main reason we were leaving the country.
but something strikes you when you move to america and when you travel around the world: every education system on earth has the same hierarchy of subjects.
there isn't an education system on the planet that teaches dance everyday to children the way we teach them mathematics.
i think this is rather important.
and there you will see it -- grown men and women writhing uncontrollably, off the beat, waiting until it ends so they can go home and write a paper about it.
they all came into being to meet the needs of industrialism.
and i think we can't afford to go on that way.
we know three things about intelligence.
we think about the world in all the ways that we experience it.
i used to be on the board of the royal ballet in england, as you can see.
so, this oak-paneled room, and she was there with her mother, and she was led and sat on this chair at the end, and she sat on her hands for 20 minutes while this man talked to her mother about all the problems gillian was having at school.
but as they went out the room, he turned on the radio that was sitting on his desk.
and they watched for a few minutes and he turned to her mother and said, "mrs.
take her to a dance school."
we walked in this room and it was full of people like me.
people who had to move to think."
who had to move to think.
i believe our only hope for the future is to adopt a new conception of human ecology, one in which we start to reconstitute our conception of the richness of human capacity.
we have to be careful now that we use this gift wisely and that we avert some of the scenarios that we've talked about.
and the only way we'll do it is by seeing our creative capacities for the richness they are and seeing our children for the hope that they are.
and our job is to help them make something of it.
i think humor is a great way to celebrate our differences.
now is the time for us to laugh at ourselves, before others can laugh with us.
so i quickly went to work with a great team around me.
we have a positive story to tell and image to sell.
here are three questions that i like to use to test the truthiness of our representation in any media story.
i'm standing in front of you today in all humility, wanting to share with you my journey of the last six years in the field of service and education.
the first thing that we did was walk through the slums.
we couldn't go to all the slums, but we tried to cover as much as we could.
we talked to the parents, tried to convince them about sending their children to school.
how many children will you get?
how are you going to scale?
how are you going to replicate?"
it was very difficult not to get scared, not to get daunted.
we want to take one child at a time and take the child right through school, sent to college, and get them prepared for better living, a high value job."
our first school was on a rooftop of a building inside the slums, a second story building, the only second story building inside the slums.
and all of us that were under that roof are still here together today.
no one in their family has spoken english.
although they are like in different contexts, one is magical, the other two are like investigation, i like those books because they have something special in them.
i mean like once i pick up one book i cannot put it down until i finish the whole book.
even if it takes me four and a half hours, or three and half hours to finish my book, i do it.
and this little boy has been coming to school for five years.
but isn't it strange that little boys all over the world love fast bikes?
you should just come across to see how well our children do.
all parents all over the world want their children to lead a better life than themselves, but they need to believe that change is possible.
now they have started writing their signature.
we had 25 mothers who came regularly after school to study.
we have about three fathers who have been trained to cook.
we have helped them set up the kitchen and now they are supplying food to all our children.
they do a very good job because their children are eating their food, but most importantly this is the first time they have got respect, and they feel that they are doing something worthwhile.
whenever we see that iima, it was such a pride for us to go to that camp.
even now we are in touch through facebook.
it was so good to hear!
and today she wants to be a neurologist.
and our children are coming back home with bags full of medals, with lots of admirers and friends.
we also have our very own dream team.
it is not the infrastructure, not the toilets, not the libraries, but it is what actually happens in this school that is more important.
when we started parikrma we had no idea which direction we were taking.
but we know for sure that what we want to do today is take one child at a time, not get bogged with numbers, and actually see the child complete the circle of life, and unleash his total potential.
but we began with the idea of one child at a time.
he was begging by a bus stop a few years ago, got picked up and is now in an orphanage, has been coming to school for the last four and a half months.
he has learned how to speak english.
and if you ask him what he likes to do he will say, "i like sleeping.
but today i have been transformed.
i have been changed with my children.
and it comes out in january, and i hope you all buy it in triplicate.
but i was thinking about this, and i realized that although my new book makes me happy, and i think would make my mother happy, it's not really about happiness.
so i decided instead, i would talk about someone who i think has done as much to make americans happy as perhaps anyone over the last 20 years, a man who is a great personal hero of mine: someone by the name of howard moskowitz, who is most famous for reinventing spaghetti sauce.
which should tell you something about that relationship.
and he would think it through and say, what was wrong?
and one day, he was sitting in a diner in white plains, about to go trying to dream up some work for nescafe.
they were looking for the perfect pepsi, and they should have been looking for the perfect pepsis.
you should be looking for the perfect pepsis."
and this was even more important.
and he brought in people by the truckload.
assumption number one in the food industry used to be that the way to find out what people want to eat -- what will make people happy -- is to ask them.
and a critically important step in understanding our own desires and tastes is to realize that we cannot always explain what we want deep down.
it's what people always say when you ask them what they want in a coffee.
and everyone's take-home lesson from that was that the way to get to make people happy is to give them something that is more expensive, something to aspire to.
it's to make them turn their back on what they think they like now, and reach out for something higher up the mustard hierarchy.
mustard does not exist on a hierarchy.
there is no good mustard or bad mustard.
what do i mean by that?
this is the best way it ought to be in this restaurant."
and where did that come from?
which were thin, and you just put a little bit over it and it sunk down to the bottom of the pasta.
they were looking for one way to treat all of us.
genetics has opened the door to the study of human variability.
and the example he used was coffee.
i thought this was a little strange at the time.
what i didn't know at the time was that my father had actually been born with perfect eyesight.
as near as we can tell, it had nothing whatsoever to do with that solar eclipse, but by then my grandmother had already gone to her grave thinking it was her fault.
i played a lot of chess.
but at the age of 14, a friend of mine got me interested in comic books, and i decided that was what i wanted to do for a living.
and i think a lot of people in his day probably thought he was a bit of a kook.
the vision of that which has already been proven or can be ascertained.
i think these are the four principles that go into this.
these are four very different ways of looking at the world.
comics is a kind of call and response in which the artist gives you something to see within the panels, and then gives you something to imagine between the panels.
so i wrote a book about this in '93, but as i was finishing the book, i had to do a little bit of typesetting, and i was tired of going to my local copy shop to do it, so i bought a computer.
this was even before the web.
and i found my personal answer for this in those ancient comics that i was showing you.
the same thing is happening, and that is that the basic idea that as you move through space you move through time is being carried out without any compromise, but there were compromises when print hit.
we could do a turn in a story that was literally a turn.
so i had all these notions.
this was back in the late '90s, and other people in my business thought i was pretty crazy, but a lot of people then went on and actually did it.
i just want to get to the last panel.
i think this is important because media, all media, provide us a window back into our world.
but media provides us with a window back into the world that we live in.
i am also joined by my partner in crime, thomas dolby.
and as great as these books were, you could always tell that you were getting close to the full effect.
even as a child, i remember thinking that what i really wanted most in life was to be able to understand everything and then to communicate it to everyone else.
finally, after about 10 years of alienating friends and strangers alike, i finally got it, a new personal truth all my own, that if i was going to ever communicate well with other people the ideas that i was gaining, i'd better find a different way of going about it.
now as to what i mean by the best comedy and satire, i mean work that comes first and foremost from a place of honesty and integrity.
now let me give you an example from my act.
if you have a baby and you think that baby's gay, you should be allowed to put it up for adoption.
you have given birth to an abomination.
personally, i was praying for four more fires so we could finally complete the damn science.
so my suggestion to those of you out here who are seriously focused on creating a better world is to take a little bit of time each day and practice thinking funny, because you might just find the question that you've been looking for.
how far back does that go?
how many tens of thousands of years does it go back?
you may just know more about everything than anyone.
and i play when i design.
but the serious part is what threw me, and i couldn't quite get a handle on it until i remembered an essay.
children almost always begin by being serious, which is what makes them so entertaining when compared with adults as a class.
it's filled with the kind of craft laws that come from something being the first of its kind.
that's because you don't know anything and you have a lot to learn, and so that anything you do is a learning experience and you're just jumping right up there.
and in my 35 years of working experience, i think i was really serious four times.
and what -- the way i looked at design and the way i looked at the world was, what was going on around me and the things that came at the time i walked into design were the enemy.
and there weren't a lot of books about the history of design in the early 70s.
you had to go to europe.
you had to go places and find the stuff.
and first i was praised for it, then criticized for it, but the fact of the matter was, i had become solemn.
i didn't do what i think was a piece of serious work again for about 14 years.
and in that moment of desire and focus, he can win.
and george wolf had taken over from another director and he wanted to change the theater, and he wanted to make it urban and loud and a place that was inclusive.
and it was the only job, even though i was doing other jobs.
i still work for the public theater.
and that is a kiss of death for something serious because it makes it solemn.
they used to climb up on the building and call me and tell me that they had to correct my typography -- that my spacing was wrong, and they moved it, and they did wonderful things with it.
and that began to make it solemn.
that was the play part of the job.
i thought i was going to go crazy at the end of this year.
they would take me about six months initially, but then i started getting faster at it.
and i -- they started to become more political, and i picked areas that sort of were in the news or that i had some feeling about, and i began doing these things.
i found that i was no longer at play.
and that's a terrifying factor -- when you start something and it turns that way -- because it means that all that's left for you is to go back and to find out what the next thing is that you can push, that you can invent, that you can be ignorant about, that you can be arrogant about, that you can fail with, and that you can be a fool with.
i'd like to start tonight by something completely different, asking you to join me by stepping off the land and jumping into the open ocean for a moment.
now this is typically how you see sunfish, this is where they get their common name.
well, as with anything in biology, nothing really makes sense except in the light of evolution.
imagine what a 10 foot one has.
now imagine if you gave birth to a little baby, and you had to feed this thing.
that would mean that your child, you would expect it to gain the weight of six titanics.
and how do you do that?
how do you do that with an animal -- very few places in the world.
this is an open ocean creature.
so what are we trying to find out?
monterey is one of the few places in the world where molas come in large numbers.
and over in these places, the molas are caught in set nets that line these countries.
do they go from one side of the pacific to the other?
and we found that they kind of are homebodies.
and what's exciting -- you all travel, and you know the best thing about traveling is to be able to find the locals, and to find the great places by getting the local knowledge.
which brings me to my last point, and what i think is kind of the most fun.
i set up a website because i was getting so many questions about molas and sunfish.
and what i found most exciting is that everyone had a shared -- a shared love and an interest in the oceans.
but this is really just the beginning.
so i'd love to talk to you all, and invite you to come down and take a closer look.
and then i -- that was the first thing i learned, and then i started progressing to other things.
how does it feel to see someone like this come along taking your art and doing so much with it?
if you have another 30 or 40 seconds, and you have another 30 or 40 seconds, and we just see that, i just think -- i can feel it.
we want to hear a little more.
she was the wife of an even more famous brahmin.
the woman paid him no heed.
he realized at once what had happened.
may he be called to wash away his sins."
very confused at what we humans call justice.
there is a certain pattern in who gets charged with crimes.
for me it came very early.
she told him and he set out the first inquiry into what today we call dowry dance.
imagine a dance piece for the first inquiry into something that even today kills thousands of women.
it was an idea that could not profit anybody but would help health in every field.
because there is no profit in it.
but it still needs to get to people.
and here is one of the ways we get it to people.
our drinking water safe we make.
our drinking water safe we make.
and through this we will have clean water.
i think it's safe to say that all of us here are deeply concerned about the escalating violence in our daily lives.
so, why are we not doing something to actually attend that problem on a day to day basis?
what are we doing to try and make children and young people realize that violence is something that we indulge in, that we can stop, and that there are other ways of actually taking violence, taking anger, taking frustrations into different things that do not harm other people.
so much peace in one place?
one little gene in you has been trying to get through?
so, why is it, that if we think that we all agree that we need a better world, we need a more just world, why is it that we are not using the one language that has consistently showed us that we can break down barriers, that we can reach people?
it needs to be the yeast."
what is it that we need?
we need to break down our vision of what planners are, of what the correct way of a path is.
and to say all these years of trying to make a better world, and we have failed.
there are more people being raped.
and that is what i want.
but the king had an idea.
he invited all the princes to come and defeat his daughter at whistling.
"whoever defeats my daughter shall have half my kingdom and her hand in marriage!"
i am going to go to each of these young men and i am going to ask them if they defeated correctly.
so she went up to each and said, "do you accept that i have defeated you?"
it was a dream that did not happen.
it was a little bit like ted: it brought a whole lot of very smart people together.
you could do the whole thing with addition.
and leibniz was the first person to really talk about building such a machine.
so it opens up a whole new world, and these people saw it.
this includes a large amount of human error.
this now is the third different output.
this is some of the generations of his universe.
you have a genotype and you have to have a phenotype.
they have to go out and do something.
and they did start to evolve.
and he went around the country after that.
and he went out of his way to say that he was not saying this was lifelike, or a new kind of life.
and could you do it again now?
he was thinking far ahead, to how this would really grow into a new kind of life.
we are but the base of chaos.
but one thing is true: we are at the beginning of a mighty struggle for control of the internet.
these were the various things that i was looking at as i was trying to understand it.
but in order to try and explain the whole thing, i would need another 18 minutes or so to do it, so you're just going to have to take it on trust from me on this occasion, and let me assure you that all of these issues are involved in cybersecurity and control of the internet one way or the other, but in a configuration that even stephen hawking would probably have difficulty trying to get his head around.
and so nothing is going into the hackers.
of course, the criminal justice system treats them as common old garden criminals.
but what about the real cybercriminals?
and he said that he had so much money stashed in his upper-east side apartment at one point that he just didn't know what to do with it and actually fell into a depression.
he was out there on the town having a fab time enjoying the high life.
and i want to explain this to you by introducing you to six characters who i met while i was doing this research.
and he did a great job in it.
you have to understand though that from his ninth birthday, the only environment he knew was gangsterism.
he knew no other way of making a living and making money.
and when he finally woke up to his situation and understood the implications, he was already in too deep.
now the important thing about all of these people is they share certain characteristics despite the fact that they come from very different environments.
thank you very much for listening.
we just never knew how to get there, what we were doing.
we want to work with you."
sadly, in the next 18 minutes when i do our chat, four americans that are alive will be dead from the food that they eat.
i profoundly believe that the power of food has a primal place in our homes that binds us to the best bits of life.
this is one of the most unhealthy countries in the world.
can i please just see a raise of hands for how many of you have children in this room today?
your child will live a life ten years younger than you because of the landscape of food that we've built around them.
every single one of those in the red is a diet-related disease.
i went to the eye of the storm.
i want to show a picture of my friend brittany.
she has six years to live.
i need you to understand it.
fast food has taken over the whole country; we know that.
the biggest problem with the home is that used to be the heart of passing on food, food culture, what made our society.
i want to show you a situation that is very normal right now; the edwards family.
and i need you to know that this is going to kill your children early.
do you know what that is?
do you know what that is?
what do you think this is?
i want to talk about something so basic as milk.
every kid has the right to milk at school.
do you know what i mean?
they just sell us what we want.
they need to help us shop.
i know how they do it.
you can care and be commercial.
i truly believe that change will happen.
around america, if we just look back now, there is plenty of wonderful things going on.
there is plenty of beautiful things going on.
when i was in huntington, trying to get a few things to work when they weren't, i thought "if i had a magic wand, what would i do?"
eve ensler: happiness in body and soul
i was worried what we think about vaginas, and even more worried that we don't think about them.
i was worried about my own vagina.
so i decided to talk to women about their vaginas.
i talked with over 200 women.
it doesn't matter how many times you say the word, it never sounds like a word you want to say.
you need to air out your pussy-cat."
and so i said to a friend casually, "well, what do you think about your vagina?"
and that woman said something more amazing, and then the next woman said something more amazing, and before i knew it, every woman was telling me i had to talk to somebody about their vagina because they had an amazing story, and i was sucked down the vagina trail.
i don't know that that would have been my life ambition.
i remember when i started practicing buddhism 14 years ago, and i was told that the end of this practice was to be happy, i said, "how could you be happy and live in this world of suffering and live in this world of pain?"
and what happened through the course of the "vagina monologues" and this journey is i think i have come to understand a little bit more about happiness.
i think what i learned from talking about the vagina, and speaking about the vagina, is it was the most obvious thing -- it was right in the center of my body and the center of the world -- and yet it was the one thing nobody talked about.
the second thing is that what talking about the vagina did is it opened this door which allowed me to see that there was a way to serve the world to make it better.
but this wave started, and if i question the wave, or try to stop the wave or look back at the wave, i often have the experience of whiplash or the potential of my neck breaking.
but if i go with the wave, and i trust the wave and i move with the wave, i go to the next place, and it happens logically and organically and truthfully.
and i started this piece, particularly with stories and narratives, and i was talking to one woman and that led to another woman and that led to another woman, and then i wrote those stories down and i put them out in front of other people.
and every single time i did the show at the beginning, women would literally line up after the show because they wanted to tell me their stories.
what could we do with this information that all these women are being violated?"
what i have learned is two things.
and women lifted their burqas and ate this ice cream, and i don't think i ever understood pleasure until that moment, and how women have found a way to keep their pleasure alive.
it has taken me to universities all over this country where girls are date-raped and drugged.
but i have also recognized, in the course of seeing that violence, that being in the face of things and seeing actually what's in front of us is the antidote to depression and to a feeling that one is worthless and has no value.
what has also happened is in the course of these travels -- and it's been an extraordinary thing -- is that every single place that i have gone to in the world, i have met a new species.
and i really love hearing about all these species at the bottom of the sea.
i have met these women everywhere on the planet.
and i want to tell a few stories because i believe that stories are the way that we transmit information, where it goes into our bodies.
and i think that one of the things about being at ted that's been very interesting is that i live in my body a lot, and i don't live in my head very much anymore.
and the connection between body and head often brings those things into union.
she was 14 years old, and she was in a marriage and her husband was beating her on a regular basis, and she couldn't get out because she was addicted to the relationship and she had no money.
i was beaten by my husband for five years.
i left and you can too."
she went to juarez to take care of an ailing aunt, and over the course of it, she began to discover what was happening to the murdered and disappeared women of juarez.
there has been no response to the disappearance, and not one person has been held accountable.
and as we walked through the streets, the people of juarez, who normally don't even come into the streets because the streets are so dangerous, literally stood there and wept to see that other people from the world had showed up for that particular community.
i met her three years ago in kenya.
and agnes was mutilated as a little girl, she was circumcised against her will when she was 10 years old, and she really made a decision that she didn't want this practice to continue anymore in her community.
and in the course of her travel she walked literally for eight years through the rift valley, through dust, through sleeping on the ground -- because the masais are nomads, and she would literally have to find them, and they would move, and she would find them again.
and in that time she created an alternative ritual which involved girls coming of age without the cut.
so we bought her a jeep.
and in the year that she had the jeep, she saved 4,500 girls from being cut.
and always as a child i had this fantasy that somebody would come and rescue me.
and i actually made up a little character whose name was mr.
alligator, and i would call him up when things got really bad, and i would say it was time to come and pick me up.
and i would go and pack a little bag and i would wait for mr.
and i want to tell you a great story.
and it hit me in that moment that it had taken 47 years, but that mr.
and he'd show up obviously in a form that it took me a long time to understand, which is that when we give in the world what we want the most, we heal the broken part inside each of us.
and i feel that knowledge and that journey has been an extraordinary privilege, and i feel really blessed to have been here today to communicate that to you.
never mind the fact that they were slow to acknowledge they needed saving.
he was a puckish widower whose wife and children were dead and whose grandchildren lived far away.
he went to the commercial business high school as a young man in budapest, and there he was as smart as he was modest and he enjoyed a considerable success.
he built one plant after another.
he married and had two sons.
he had friends in high places who assured him that he was of great value to the economy.
once, as he had left instructions to have done, he was summoned in the middle of the night by the night watchman at one of his plants.
if you need money you have only to ask."
he will not steal from us again."
and then one day, it happened: he and his family were arrested and they were taken to a death house on the danube.
but none who entered that death house had ever come out alive.
buy us some land in kings mountain and announce we are going to build a major plant there."
teszler, i sure hope you're going to hire some black workers for this new plant of yours."
do you have any other questions?"
do you have any other questions?"
but it was music that was his greatest passion, especially opera.
and on the first occasion that i visited his house, he gave me honor of deciding what piece of music we would listen to.
and i made a vow to myself, then and there, that if this man who had such cause to think otherwise had reached that conclusion, i would not presume to differ until he released me from my vow.
they would not leave me alone until i let them have a piece, but it was not a good one."
public health is another reason to consider retrofitting.
that basically, the boomers want to be able to age in place, and gen y would like to live an urban lifestyle, but most of their jobs will continue to be out in suburbia.
it no longer just makes sense.
it now makes sense to go back in, build a deck and build up on those sites.
never underestimate the power of food to turn a place around and make it a destination.
if home is the first place and work is the second place, the third place is where you go to hang out and build community.
but some of them have been much more incremental.
here is the site in 1940: it was just a little farm in the village of hyattsville.
plans have already been announced for a lot of those garden apartments above the mall to be redeveloped.
they had their prom in the mall.
i could imagine beautiful housing going up along there without tearing down another tree.
it also makes sense in very strong markets.
we need to be able to target which areas really should be re-greened.
and where should we be encouraging re-inhabitation?
i led a team that was asked to imagine atlanta 100 years from now.
they are new but trying to look old.
there was an important lesson for me in that.
he wanted us to look and ask basic questions of objects.
some of them are so big we had, to get them into the museum, we had to take them up the great steps at the front.
there was a lot of skepticism.
but in reality, in the course of the coming weeks and months, hundreds of thousands of people came to see the show.
and you can just imagine them.
but it brought it alive to them.
these were images of the world in the past, and that it was the same for our audience.
it could have been a train wreck.
by the end of the show, we had people queuing for four or five hours to get into the show, but no one really complained.
and i think this is a process that helps us better understand ourselves, helps us make better decisions about where we're going.
from there, you can walk in any direction to almost any culture.
i'm working to try and break down that sense of that elitism.
and they are in our backyard.
there is no government to protect them.
pm: and the doctors have some very big rules about who can get treated at the clinic.
would you explain the rules for admission?
we are sharing with them whatever we have.
but there are only two rules.
the other thing that i have realized, that the woman is the most strong person all over the world.
they were the leaders, and we are the leaders of our community and the hope of our future generations.
so we came up with these two rules.
in a camp with 90,000 people, you have to come up with some rules or there is going to be some fights.
they are not alone for this.
you've created your own rules, in which women and children are getting a different sense of security.
mohamed, to work together -- for you to become a doctor and to work with your mother in these circumstances.
when the war broke out -- civil war -- i saw how my mother was helping and how she really needed the help, and how the care is essential to the woman to be a woman doctor in somalia and help the women and children.
and to go back and to work with our mother is just what we saw in the civil war -- when i was 16, and my sister was 11, when the civil war broke out.
so it was the need and the people we saw in the early '90s -- that's what made us go back and work for them.
and when i saw the people who needed me, i was staying with them to help, because i [could] do something for them.
they have done what i desire to do for them.
why are people afraid of the ocean?
i'm going to make it right now in case i forget.
everything i'm going to present to you was not in my textbooks when i went to school.
it was something we laughed at.
we were looking for something and found something else.
this is a characterization of what it would look like if you could remove the water.
but in the early days, the only way i could get to the bottom was to crawl into a submarine, a very small submarine, and go down to the bottom.
we understood mountains under compression, but we could not understand why we had a mountain under tension.
we went up to them with our submersible.
none of it in our textbooks.
none of this in our textbooks.
we did not know about this life system.
and we called it lost city.
we went in underneath and tapped it, and we found that it had the ph of drano.
so life was much more creative than we had ever thought.
it contains more history than all of the museums on land combined.
look at the state of those artifacts.
we begin to go on the hill and lobby.
and we stole recently a ship from the united states navy.
but we have no idea what we're going find when we go out there with our technology.
we can then build a command center.
but i will let a kid with no license take over control of my vehicle system.
we need to be not only proud of our universities.
we need to be proud of our middle schools.
because this is what we want.
and my final question, my final question -- why are we not looking at moving out onto the sea?
i was born to a family where education was pervasive.
so it was taken for granted that i attend some of the best universities, which in turn opened the door to a world of opportunity.
unfortunately, most of the people in the world are not so lucky.
and as a consequence, today there is just not enough spots for the many more people who want and deserve a high quality education.
there were a handful of positions left open from the standard admissions process, and the night before they were supposed to open that for registration, thousands of people lined up outside the gate in a line a mile long, hoping to be first in line to get one of those positions.
she was a mother who gave her life trying to get her son a chance at a better life.
there has been much discussed in the last few years about the rising cost of health care.
what might not be quite as obvious to people is that during that same period the cost of higher education tuition has been increasing at almost twice the rate, for a total of 559 percent since 1985.
he said the big breakthroughs are what happen when what is suddenly possible meets what is desperately necessary.
so, having seen the impact of this, andrew and i decided that we needed to really try and scale this up, to bring the best quality education to as many people as we could.
so we formed coursera, whose goal is to take the best courses from the best instructors at the best universities and provide it to everyone around the world for free.
what made it different was that this was real course experience.
at the end of the course, the students got a certificate.
perhaps one of the biggest components of this effort is that we need to have students who practice with the material in order to really understand it.
so they get to try again, and this time they got it right.
and now the video moves on to the next part of the lecture.
so we had to come up with a different solution.
but this is not just about students sitting alone in their living room working through problems.
and the really amazing thing is, because there were so many students, it means that even if a student posed a question at 3 o'clock in the morning, somewhere around the world, there would be somebody who was awake and working on the same problem.
and you can see from the student testimonials that students actually find that because of this large online community, they got to interact with each other in many ways that were deeper than they did in the context of the physical classroom.
the first is that it has the potential of giving us a completely unprecedented look into understanding human learning.
the answers happen to be pairs of numbers, so you can draw them on this two-dimensional plot.
each of the little crosses that you see is a different wrong answer.
the big cross at the top left is where 2,000 students gave the exact same wrong answer.
now, if two students in a class of 100 give the same wrong answer, you would never notice.
so andrew and his students went in, looked at some of those assignments, understood the root cause of the misconception, and then they produced a targeted error message that would be provided to every student whose answer fell into that bucket, which means that students who made that same mistake would now get personalized feedback telling them how to fix their misconception much more effectively.
so this personalization is something that one can then build by having the virtue of large numbers.
imagine if we could teach so that 98 percent of our students would be above average.
but maybe we can afford to provide each student with a computer or a smartphone.
so the question is, how can we use technology to push from the left side of the graph, from the blue curve, to the right side with the green curve?
so the goal here is to try and push, and see how far we can get towards the green curve.
so how do we do that?
so maybe this is how we should spend our time at universities.
so to summarize, if we could offer a top quality education to everyone around the world for free, what would that do?
first it would establish education as a fundamental human right, where anyone around the world with the ability and the motivation could get the skills that they need to make a better life for themselves, their families and their communities.
it's a shame that for so many people, learning stops when we finish high school or when we finish college.
and if we could offer that person an education, they would be able to come up with the next big idea and make the world a better place for all of us.
and then someone told me there is a flip side to it.
and the odds are seven to one against your finding the prince.
when they lay together in bed it was, as it had to be, as the nature of the act demanded, an act of violence.
and this still goes on as i think i told you last year.
i think it can go too far.
i think ringling brothers may have gone too far with an ad they took out in the new york times magazine.
but you know -- i don't think that a person of color making fun of white people is the same thing as a white person making fun of people of color.
or women making fun of men is the same as men making fun of women.
or poor people making fun of rich people, the same as rich people.
i think you can make fun of the have but not the have-nots, which is why you don't see me making fun of kenneth lay and his charming wife.
and i got good at that when i was in stand up.
and i was looking for a form that didn't have that.
and so i wanted something that was more interactive.
i know that word is so debased now by the use of it by internet marketers.
i used to actually hang up on them.
and it was like being psychoanalyzed.
i mean he had laid it all out.
but i like to cross boundaries.
he was a very selfish meme.
and he said that i had to show more respect because it took up to 18 years to learn how to do mime properly.
it only takes two years to learn how to talk.
and this is instead of contradiction.
but my example of it is a sign that i saw in a jewelry store.
the trickster has a mind that is prepared for the unprepared.
that, and i will say this to the scientists, that the trickster has the ability to hold his ideas lightly so that he can let room in for new ideas or to see the contradictions or the hidden problems with his ideas.
but here's how i think i like to make change, and that is in making connections.
this is what i tend to see almost more than contradictions.
and the other one though is impenetrability.
yes of course you got that.
i still have a way to go.
and the mother goes right through a red light.
and the mother goes through a second red light.
i just want to say two more things.
finding the balance between those things is always dangerous because you might tip off too much in the direction of unprepared.
but to do that you have to lose all the other qualities because once you're into beauty you're into a finished thing.
and it is always extraordinary to see a thing of beauty.
i like to think of what i do as a probability wave.
and the one final quality i want to say about trickster is that he doesn't have a home.
and thank you for inviting me into it.
i was thinking about my place in the universe, and about my first thought about what infinity might mean, when i was a child.
so we don't really have a place in the universe, as far as on a time line.
will we be wiped out by an asteroid?
stephen petranek counts down to armageddon
but there was something else that i've noticed as those changes were taking place, as people were starting to find out that hmm ... yeah, there really is a black hole at the center of every galaxy.
and they would inevitably end up in what i thought was a very bizarre place, which is ways the world could end very suddenly.
but i also hope, because i think the people in this room can literally change the world, i hope you take some of this stuff away with you, and when you have an opportunity to be influential, that you try to get some heavy-duty money spent on some of these ideas.
we are all much healthier than we were 20 years ago.
our life longevity is going up almost a year for every year that passes.
and we know just an amazing amount more about the brain now than we did 10 years ago.
the count now is up to 80 -- we're finding about two or three a month.
we can look at our own history.
thank god you can all read!
it may seem ridiculous, but we have a really lousy history of anticipating things like this and actually being prepared for them.
and that is not something that is beyond comprehension at this point.
this is one of the things they ought to be thinking more about.
we're going to have to start doing this around the globe.
what can we do about this?
this stuff was supposed to only be feed for animals in the united states, and it got into the human food supply, and somebody should've figured out that it would get in the human food supply very easily.
believe it or not, this happens every few hundred thousand years, and has happened many times in our history.
i wrote a story about this in life magazine in 1993.
really more like 500 years to do it right.
this is like being at war and giving somebody your secret code.
for three months out of the year, they go to 50 below zero.
what can we do about this?
the important thing to remember here -- this is not a question of if, this is a question of when, and how big.
we think the one that got the dinosaurs was about five miles wide.
now look at the one right below that.
but we would have lots of time, if we see it coming.
the worst thing we can do is say, jeez, i got enough to worry about without worrying about an asteroid.
he said more with less than any human that i have ever read or talked to.
sylvia has said we must use every capacity we have in order to know the oceans.
if we would know the oceans, we must go to the oceans.
there are a few key points.
so what scientists do when they begin is to start with the system.
and these two war against one another almost continuously.
this is a system that's been around a very long time.
what do i mean by that?
we know little or nothing about it.
and many of you remember the early stages of oceanography, when we had to use what we had at our fingertips.
and the program that i wanted to talk to you about just a little bit here, was funded, and it involves autonomous vehicles like the one running across the base of this image.
and this particular set here can transmit something of the order of three to five terabits per second.
this is what it looks like.
and the kind of science that can be done will be determined by a variety of scientists who want to be involved and can bring the instrumentation to the table.
and this is just the first of these.
now i want to take you into the caldera.
here's what this system is going to look like that we are funded to build at this point.
this is going to be much more powerful than having a single ship in a single location, then move to a new location.
this is what it actually looks like.
so what can we actually do tomorrow?
there are many kinds of things that can be used in the ocean, continuously.
and this is the magic one.
so within five to seven years, i see us having a capacity to be completely present throughout the ocean and have all of that connected to the internet, so we can reach many, many folks.
we could do work on the sea floor that would be stunning, and it would be on live tv, if we have interesting things to show.
and as i go here, i just want to show you what we can bring into classrooms, and indeed, what we can bring into your pocket.
many of you don't think of this yet, but the ocean will be in your pocket.
so let me leave you then with a few words from another poet, if you'll forgive me.
and that wonder is really what has created the greatest cities, the greatest spaces that we have had.
by the way, it is a story that is told through its hard materials.
but it is a story of effort and struggle against improbabilities.
anything that has been made can be made better.
there it is: the things that i really believe are of important architecture.
and yet it is in times like this that i think architecture can thrive with big ideas, ideas that are not small.
they were built in times that were not really the best of times in a certain way.
it is actually a living connection to the cosmic event that we are part of, and a story that is certainly ongoing.
it's not something that has a good ending or a bad ending.
it's actually a story in which our acts themselves are pushing the story in a particular way.
there is a lot of appreciation for the kind of cool architecture.
and of course, we are all about the struggle of emotions.
and i think that is what makes the world a wondrous place.
i think that is the progress of cities.
we realize that the hand has been given us by forces that are beyond our own autonomy.
and we live in a world which is connecting us more and more.
but the one thing that can be ever simulated is the human heart, the human soul.
and architecture is so closely intertwined with it because we are born somewhere and we die somewhere.
it's not something that comes to us from books and theories.
we think the world really looks like our buildings.
and of course that juxtaposition is of great interest to me because it creates a kind of a spark of new energy.
and often it takes just a building to change our experience of what could be done, what has been done, how the world has remained both in between stability and instability.
and of course buildings have their shapes.
so i believe that my main interest is to memory.
we would not know which way we were going, and why we are going where we're going.
silence maybe is good for a cemetery but not for a city.
it should not play it safe, because if it plays it safe it's not moving us in a direction that we want to be.
and of course that is finally what i believe architecture to be.
and i think that is really the nature of architecture.
now i am a believer in democracy.
there is so many parties to this project.
i think nothing good will come out of that.
and it is about the dirty word "compromise."
and that is where i end.
this is what we dream about.
i was taught not to be a loser, not to be somebody who just gives up in a fight.
you have to fight for what you believe.
and i believe that what will be built at ground zero will be meaningful, will be inspiring, will tell other generations of the sacrifices, of the meaning of this event.
i think, how is it possible for a man with so much time to tell his story in 18 minutes?
but my story that i would like to share with you today is the one about success.
it is about a country in the southwest of africa called namibia.
this is where i was born.
and one day, my father actually took me into the bush.
"and he will let go of the goat and run off."
puff up and just look it in the eye and it may not want to fight you."
"imagine you run faster than those goats you are looking after."
and it is very important if you are in the field to know what to confront and what to run from.
they could sell these things for anything between $5,000 a kilo.
it killed almost everything that was left.
i remember a night when a hungry leopard went into the house of one of our neighbors and took a sleeping child out of the bed.
and they sent me off to school, just to get busy somewhere there.
they actually spend a lot of time a year in the communities.
my father has been a poacher for quite a long time.
three things that actually help to build on this foundation: the very first one is honoring of tradition and being open to new ideas.
and i think this is the best way of regulating ourselves on the environment.
and here are the new ideas.
and these things we were taught by outsiders.
we learned these things from outsiders.
we needed new boundaries to describe our traditional lands; we needed to learn more things like gps just to see whether -- can gps really reflect the true reflection of the land or is this just a thing made somewhere in the west?
the second element is that we wanted to have a life, a better life where we can benefit through many things.
they were not people from outside.
and that was a very strong thing in namibia.
business communities helped bring namibia onto the world map and they have also helped make wildlife a very valuable land use like any other land uses such as agriculture.
this is outside the protected area.
they stay very much far away because this other thing has multiplied from less than a thousand to tens of thousands of animals.
and we are able to use this money for many things: very importantly, we put it in education.
and this is the good news from africa that we have to shout from the rooftops.
there is great confusion when the two look at each other.
it's the place where we can see and touch and hear and feel climate change in action.
whether or not you believe in it is based on your sense of is it raining more or is it raining less?
is it getting hotter or is it getting colder?
and that led me to this project.
i stand here before you tonight as an ambassador for my whole team.
we've been out for two and a half years, and we've got about another two and a half years yet to go.
the other half of our job is to tell the story to the global public.
this exact same pattern is seen going back now almost a million years before our current time.
you can see that from the orange line and the blue line.
goes up to 280 and then drops for various reasons that aren't important to discuss right here.
we have to turn that around.
this is what one of our cameras saw over the course of a few months.
to give you a little bit of a sense of scale, that calving face in this picture is about 325 feet tall.
this is not a little cliff.
now we turn on our time lapse.
that happened in about a month, the loss of all that ice.
you can see this river being formed.
all those colors are ice and it goes up to about two miles thick, just a gigantic dome that comes in from the coast and rises in the middle.
we have a problem of perception.
but what we have is a perception problem because not enough people really get it yet.
but we still need to bring a lot of people along with us.
because i believe we have an opportunity right now.
this is a terrific, terrific call to arms to do the right thing for ourselves and for the future.
i hope that we have the wisdom to let the angels of our better nature rise to the occasion and do what needs to be done.
i want to know the people behind my dinner choices.
i want to know why they fish.
so what do we call this?
it is a more hopeful, it is a more human, and is a more useful way of understanding our environment.
but what if we eat only in the green list?
do i do this three times a week?
the point is that we have to have a context, a gauge for our actions in all this.
the problem is we are hiding that cost beneath the waves.
but we also must eat it with a ton of vegetables.
so i think we have this whole eating thing wrong.
and so i think it's time we change what we expect from our food.
just because it comes from a green source doesn't mean we can treat it with disregard on the plate.
people got, in short, more of what they came there for even though they got less protein.
this is what we need to favor.
this is what the green list says.
but this is also how we can actually begin to restore our environment.
celebrate the opportunity you have to eat this.
i expect a lot from food.
i expect health and joy and family and community.
i expect that producing ingredients, preparing dishes and eating meals is all part of the communion of human interests.
and he taught me very early on about the privilege that eating represents.
i remember well the meals of my childhood.
i get sick when i go to steakhouses.
but of all the dire news that you'll hear and that you have heard about the state of our oceans, i have the unfortunate burden of delivering to you possibly the very worst of it and that is this whole time your mother was right.
so what are we looking for in a meal?
so try and learn as best you can what that impact is and then take the first step to minimize it.
so if we all take only what we need, then we can begin to share the rest, we can begin to celebrate, we can begin to restore.
and we need to save dinner.
and this is a song medley i put together -- did you ever notice that four in the morning has become some sort of meme or shorthand?
it means something like you are awake at the worst possible hour.
it is four in the morning."
for a time that i find to be the most placid and uneventful hour of the day, four in the morning sure gets an awful lot of bad press -- across a lot of different media from a lot of big names.
could it be there is something more going on here?
it works a little something like -- this is a recent google search for four in the morning.
in fact there are people in this room who may not want me to show you this clip we're about to see.
and how far down into it you figure we'll have to scroll to get to the golden ticket?
my speechwriters must have been tearing their hair out because as we worked between one and four in the morning on inauguration day, i was still changing it."
i mean after all, this whole business happened on his watch.
gravity is also a field of forces that act on masses.
the expected five year survival is less than five percent.
and then the second group received only tumor treating field therapy.
you can see that the black regions in the upper right quadrant are the areas where he had surgery.
at this point, he was told by his doctors that he had about 3 months to live.
and here we can see him getting the therapy.
now she can run all of the activities of her farm.
and in most parts it is saline, not fit for drinking.
but we find 40 different names of clouds in this dialect used here.
and they harvest rain in many ways.
and you can notice they have created a kind of false catchment.
and this is all big raised platform.
you can notice the small holes the water will fall on this catchment, and there is a slope.
and the water will go where it should go.
and then it is 40 feet deep.
and this is pure drinking water.
but now you can have this for year round.
because we are used to get written things.
in fact they go 15 feet deep, and collect rain water from roof, there is a small pipe, and from their courtyard.
it can also harvest something like 25,000 in a good monsoon.
so, since 400 years it has been giving you almost six million gallons of water per season.
of course if you want to go inside, the two doors are locked.
you can see person coming up with two canisters of water.
of course there are some areas where water is reaching, i'm not saying that it is not reaching at all.
and it became a dream also.
because soon the water was not able to reach these areas.
but you can see that no woman is standing on those.
none of us were able to go to europe, but jaisalmer was well connected to it.
the reputation in desert of this small water body is that it never dries up.
and perhaps they knew the future also.
but this is not ground water.
you can draw ground water from any well.
but this is no ordinary well.
and they have dubbed this water as the third one called [unclear].
this is the same dry water body.
but when the water goes down they will be able to draw water from those structures throughout the year.
this year they have received only six centimeters.
so, these stone pillars will remind you that you are entering into a water body area.
if you climb these three, six steps you will find something very nice.
they say that a picture is worth a thousand words, so we can say a thousand words right now, an another thousand words.
if the water table goes down, you will find new stairs.
so, throughout the year this beautiful system will give you some pleasure.
they are in front of you.
they were using it on their body.
the center of life is water.
these are the beautiful stairs which we just saw in one of the slides.
and these are the flowers which add fragrance to our lives.
do you believe that they can be used elsewhere, that the world can learn from this?
or is this just right for this place?
if it is there it can be done right now.
that is, promote democracy in difficult places where everything else has already been tried and failed.
so if you look at it close enough, you'll actually see that much of this is about economics.
and to tell you the truth, i never really bought into this argument, in part because i never saw three american presidents agree on anything else in the past.
and they are building what i call the spinternet.
so you may wonder, why on earth are they doing it?
the moment you put something critical in a blog, even if you manage to ban it immediately, it will still spread around thousands and thousands of other blogs.
just to give you an example of how it works in china, for example.
but then authorities did something very smart.
instead of trying to purge these comments, they instead went and reached out to the bloggers.
people would keep talking about it for weeks.
you are the one who is to blame."
now you actually know how they connect to each other by looking at their facebook page.
because they somehow assume that the internet is going to be the catalyst of change that will push young people into the streets, while in fact it may actually be the new opium for the masses which will keep the same people in their rooms downloading pornography.
and there is nothing wrong about it because the internet has greatly empowered many of these young people and it plays a completely different social role for them.
but the point here is that when we get the remote russian village online, what will get people to the internet is not going to be the reports from human rights watch.
so this is something you have to recognize.
so what should we do about it?
see this man box has in it all the ingredients of how we define what it means to be a man.
and out of my own frustration of my role and responsibility of building him up as a man to fit into these guidelines and these structures that are defining this man box, i would find myself saying things like, "just go in your room.
sit down, get yourself together and come back and talk to me when you can talk to me like a --" what?
i think back to my father.
there was a time in my life where we had a very troubled experience in our family.
we lived in the bronx at the time, and the burial was in a place called long island, it was about two hours outside of the city.
and as we were preparing to come back from the burial, the cars stopped at the bathroom to let folks take care of themselves before the long ride back to the city.
he didn't want cry in front of me, but he knew he wasn't going to make it back to the city, and it was better me than to allow himself to express these feelings and emotions in front of the women.
the thing that sticks with me the most is that he was apologizing to me for crying in front of me, and at the same time, he was also giving me props, lifting me up, for not crying.
i come to also look at this as this fear that we have as men, this fear that just has us paralyzed, holding us hostage to this man box.
and i said to myself, "god, if it would destroy him to be called a girl, what are we then teaching him about girls?"
it took me back to a time when i was about 12 years old.
at this time we're living in the bronx, and in the building next to where i lived there was a guy named johnny.
he was about 16 years old, and we were all about 12 years old -- younger guys.
and he was hanging out with all us younger guys.
and this guy, he was up to a lot of no good.
and he did spend a lot of time up to no good.
he was being raised by his grandmother.
he was home alone a lot.
we all looked up to him.
now i immediately knew what he meant.
he told me to go in his room.
on his bed is a girl from the neighborhood named sheila.
so he was offering me the opportunity to do the same.
so when i go in the room, i close the door.
i stand with my back to the door so johnny can't bust in the room and see that i'm not doing anything, and i stand there long enough that i could have actually done something.
but i knew i felt bad about what was happening.
it was way more important to me, about me and my man box card than about sheila and what was happening to her.
see collectively, we as men are taught to have less value in women, to view them as property and the objects of men.
the center for disease control says that men's violence against women is at epidemic proportions, is the number one health concern for women in this country and abroad.
the world i envision for her -- how do i want men to be acting and behaving?
when the rest of the world took a beating last year, we grew at 6.7 percent.
in order to have soft power, you have to be connected.
and that makes us larger than the u.s.
but sometimes it just sat there.
i went to high school in calcutta.
and we would look at this instrument sitting in the front foyer.
but half the time we would pick it up with an expectant look on our faces, there would be no dial tone.
or you could pay eight times the going rate for something called a lightning call.
but, lightning struck rather slowly in our country in those days, so, it was like about a half an hour for a lightning call to come through.
fishermen are going out to sea and carrying their cell phones.
when they catch the fish they call all the market towns along the coast to find out where they get the best possible prices.
but these movies are made to be understood despite such handicaps, and she has a great time in the song and the dance and the action.
she goes away with stars in her eyes about india, as a result.
and this is happening more and more.
set, and then turn their attention back to the bride and groom.
it may not be a very good one.
as a student in the mid '70s, i knew what the image of india was then, if there was an image at all.
but all of these religions have found a place and a welcome home in india.
all the others have been all those three.
we have 23 official languages that are recognized in our constitution.
now we need to get this thing into practice.
and another key thing that i learned a lot throughout this whole process, last year google named me as one of the brightest young minds in the world.
and the fact that pig heart valves have lots of these on them is the reason that you can't transplant a pig heart valve into a person easily.
i mean i could immediately tap into an immune response that was already there, where it was not going to take five or six days to develop it -- it was going to immediately attack whatever this thing was on.
so you can take a bacteria that really doesn't make these things at all, and if you could clamp these on it really well you have it taken off the street.
so i might be doing something dumb, just like he was doing at the time.
see that line on the very top with the little dots?
and they actually lived another 14 days, or 28 when we finally killed them, and took them apart and figured out what went wrong.
it is the process by which animals de-animate, appear dead and then can wake up again without being harmed.
her father had gone out in the wintertime; he was working night shift, and she followed him outside in nothing but a diaper.
these are truly miraculous things that happen.
so what i was trying to do is think of a way that we could study suspended animation to think about a way to reproduce, maybe, what happened to the skier.
one of the creatures we see it in is a fish.
and we can turn its heartbeat on and off by going in and out of suspended animation like you would a light switch.
so we wondered what would happen if we took our suspended animals and exposed them to the cold.
and this was a period of time when we failed tremendously.
so we started to think: is this the agent that might have been present in the skier, and might have she had more of it than someone else, and might that have been able to reduce her demand for oxygen before she got so cold that she otherwise would have died, as we found out with our worm experiments?
and one of the things we wondered -- i'm sure some of you out there are economists, and you know all about supply and demand.
and with money we got from darpa, we could show just that.
in one model of heart attack, animals given hydrogen sulfide showed a 70 percent reduction in heart damage compared to those who got the standard of care that you and i would receive if we were to have a heart attack here today.
and this all happened really quickly because of a lot of help from a lot of people.
we hope not, or maybe we just hope to make miracles a little more common.
and it is a strange inversion.
do you know of any car that didnt have a maker?
you would have thought it stands to reason that design requires an intelligent designer.
and i wont be able to say too much about it.
and he liked to do an exercise with his students where he got them to take a piece of paper and draw the person who sat next to them, their neighbor, very quickly, just as quickly as they could.
you all have a piece of cardboard and a piece of paper.
and there should be a pencil.
am i hearing a few "sorrys"?
mckim found this every time he did it with his students.
he got exactly the same response: lots and lots of sorrys.
and he would point this out as evidence that we fear the judgment of our peers, and that were embarrassed about showing our ideas to people we think of as our peers, to those around us.
and this fear is what causes us to be conservative in our thinking.
but as they learn to become adults, they become much more sensitive to the opinions of others, and they lose that freedom and they do start to become embarrassed.
where they have the same kind of security to take risks.
he knew that friendship is a short cut to play.
and he knew that it gives us a sense of trust, and it allows us then to take the kind of creative risks that we need to take as designers.
so all of these places have these symbols.
and its actually something that we invented a few years ago, or created a few years ago.
and i forgot to bring one up with me.
if you could pass it up.
so this is a finger blaster, and you will find that every one of you has got one taped under your chair.
but before we start, i need just to put these on.
im going to see how many of you at the back of the room can actually get those things onto the stage.
i want to see how many of you can get these things on the stage.
so the rest of you can save them for when i say something particularly boring, and then you can fire at me.
so we have the finger blasters.
helps us do our jobs better, and helps us feel better when we do them.
you use it in the kitchen.
because you can do a lot more with boxes than you can do with a toy.
so it should look like this.
you should be looking at something like this.
so for example, you could turn one into a football, or another one into a sun.
i want you to do as many of them as you can, in the minute that im just about to give you.
keep your hands up if you did 10.
so i was really interested in quantity.
i wasnt actually very interested in whether they were all different.
i just wanted you to fill in as many circles as possible.
we stop ourselves from doing things.
so that ability just to go for it and explore lots of things, even if they dont seem that different from each other, is actually something that kids do well, and it is a form of play.
and then he asked them to go away and work on those problems that theyd brought.
we need to ask some of the ceos whether they were involved in this mescaline experiment.
and they were doing that through building prototypes.
when play is about building a tower out of blocks, the kid begins to learn a lot about towers.
they were meeting with them; they were talking to the surgeons about what it was they needed with this device.
and in the end it turned into a real device.
and so this behavior is all about quickly getting something into the real world, and having your thinking advanced as a result.
and then the sad thing is, although preschools are full of this kind of stuff, as kids go through the school system it all gets taken away.
and just having this very simple prototype allows her to talk about what she wants in a much more powerful way.
something like a service or an experience?
so we do quite a lot of work at ideo trying to convince our clients of this.
so here are some designers who are trying to understand what it might feel like to sleep in a confined space on an airplane.
and so they grabbed some very simple materials, you can see, and did this role-play, this kind of very crude role-play, just to get a sense of what it would be like for passengers if they were stuck in quite small places on airplanes.
because when we looked at the video when he got back, we saw 20 minutes of this.
he wants to know what it feels like to be a firefighter.
the first thing to remember is that play is not anarchy.
well, imagine if you did the same task with friends while you were drinking in a pub.
but there arent just rules about how to play; there are rules about when to play.
they transition in and out of it, and good teachers spend a lot of time thinking about how to move kids through these experiences.
and so being able to move between those modes is really quite important.
you can be serious and play.
so we do everything that leads up to success, but then we get there.
and i can tell you this happens, because it happened to me.
i can just sit back and relax."
because i did all these simple things that led to ideas.
i was faster but just as depressed.
so i went to my doctor.
and he put me on anti-depressants.
because they could see i was no longer serving them, i was only serving myself.
so they took their money and their projects to others who would serve them better.
it was down to just the two of us, and we were about to go under.
i had fun again, i worked harder and, to cut a long story short, did all the things that took me back up to success.
and when i went back to following these eight principles, the black cloud over my head disappeared altogether.
so here is to your continued success.
i wanted to be a rock star.
this was in the late '80s.
and the choir conductor there knew that i sang and invited me to come and join the choir.
the choir people in my high school were pretty geeky, and there was no way i was going to have anything to do with those people.
and i went to my first day in choir, and i sat down with the basses and sort of looked over my shoulder to see what they were doing.
and i felt for the first time in my life that i was part of something bigger than myself.
i decided to write a piece for choir a couple of years later as a gift to this conductor who had changed my life.
i had learned to read music by then, or slowly learning to read music.
and i even loved seeing behind her; i could see the little teddy bear sitting on the piano behind her in her room.
and i sent out this call to singers.
and i made free the download of the music to a piece that i had written in the year 2000 called "lux aurumque," which means "light and gold."
and i had the same reaction you did.
i actually was moved to tears when i first saw it.
we had a million hits in the first month and got a lot of attention for it.
this time we got some more mature members.
and my personal favorite, "when i told my husband that i was going to be a part of this, he told me that i did not have the voice for it."
it is a dream come true to be part of this choir, as i've never been part of one.
so two things struck me deeply about this.
the first is that human beings will go to any lengths necessary to find and connect with each other.
but we do have the first three minutes.
and it's a tremendous honor for me to be able to show it to you here first.
and he lives in the sand, and he catches things that go by overhead.
and so this guy gets the snail all set up and gives it a good whack.
and so this had me stymied for quite a long period of time.
and so we struck up a deal.
and so what we did is, we took a look at these videos, and we measured how fast the limb was moving to get back to that original question.
and we were in for our first surprise.
and for those of you who prefer miles per hour, that's over 45 miles per hour in water.
so that was really cool and very unexpected.
and so i thought that this was sort of the end of the story.
and you can see it right here.
so these are actually some old data where i had to find the smallest animals in the lab, and we were able to measure forces of well over 100 pounds generated by an animal about this big.
i have to do a little bit more background reading, but i think this will be the largest amount of force produced by an animal of a given -- per body mass.
but that was not the end of the story.
and i got all these force measurements, and then i went and looked at the force output of the system.
and you can see two peaks.
and that was what really got me puzzled.
and i hope what you are able to see is actually a flash of light.
sheila patek: and so if we just take that one frame, what you can actually see there at the end of that yellow arrow is a vapor bubble.
and when this happens, it can cause areas of very low pressure, which results in the water literally vaporizing.
and so here it is in the stomatopod.
in fact, you might have even seen some cavitation going up the edge of the limb.
and they might actually be making use of fluid dynamics as a second force for breaking the snail.
but one of the convenient things about being an arthropod is that you have to molt.
we still have one foot in the dark ages.
it seems to me that were all pointed in the wrong direction.
if i held up a square that was one foot square and the color of earth, and i held up another square that was the root two square -- so its 1.5 times bigger -- and was the color of the oceans; and i said, what is the relative value of these two things?
and if you hefted those two things you might find that the relative scale of those is 20 to 1.
the problem we have in believing that is -- you just have to give up this notion that this earth was created for us.
it features two of these deep rovers, and i can criticize them because these sweet things are mine.
and this one actually carries two great manipulators.
the problem with it is -- and the reason i will never build another one like it -- is that this is a product of two-dimensional thinking.
fish do not sit in seats.
this is the way we should be going into the oceans.
what we need to do is go down into the ocean with the freedom of the animals, and move in this three-dimensional space.
and just notice how she rolls under and turns; she doesnt sit there and try and blow air into a tank and kind of flow up or sink down -- she just rolls.
i wanted you to notice that she actually turned to come back up.
we spent about three hours together and shes beginning to trust me.
this is the first flying machine.
this was a fly by wire.
and then by moving through the water its able to take that control.
she just rolled right away from underneath.
it took 10 years to build.
we just learned so much in three hours in the water there.
i just had to go and build another machine.
it was the fact she was going so slow.
i actually designed that to move faster through the water because i thought that was the thing that we needed to do: to move fast and get range.
but after that encounter i really did want to go back with that animal and dance.
what comes next in 30 seconds?
if you look here at this map, showing everything in blue is out in the water, and everything in yellow is upland.
so we really had a lot to deal with.
when we started this project, one of the core ideas was to look back in history and try to understand what was there.
they were key in our culture and our economy.
so again, we got the short end of the deal there.
i get asked two questions about this project.
and the second one is: when can we eat the oysters?
but i think the most important one is that london was this city of 2.5 million people, and it was the largest city on the face of the planet at that point.
but it was also the largest city that had ever been built.
and they would just kind of throw the buckets down there and hope that it would somehow go away, and of course it never really would go away.
and what ended up happening is that an entire emerging public health system became convinced that it was the smell that was killing everybody, that was creating these diseases that would wipe through the city every three or four years.
and so the authorities became convinced that this smell was this problem.
we had to get rid of the smell.
and so he went right in there and started interviewing people.
something that would take in a sense a higher-level view of all this activity that had been happening in the neighborhood.
and so he created this map, which basically ended up representing all the deaths in the neighborhoods as black bars at each address.
and you can see in this map, the pump right at the center of it and you can see that one of the residences down the way had about 15 people dead.
and so you can see this something poisonous emanating out of this pump that you could see in a glance.
it's also a story really that is fundamentally optimistic, which is to say that it's possible to solve these problems if we listen to reason, if we listen to the kind of wisdom of these kinds of maps, if we listen to people like snow and whitehead, if we listen to the locals who understand what's going on in these kinds of situations.
he went on to say that every two weeks, an elder goes to the grave carrying the last spoken word of that culture.
and this happens every two weeks.
so for the last 20 years, since my dental experience, i have been traveling the world and coming back with stories about some of these people.
what i'd like to do right now is share some of those stories with you.
and when i met him, he was a kind gentle old man.
and it really impressed me -- i met him two weeks after he got out of prison -- that he went through that experience, and ended up with the demeanor that he had.
and what he said was: treat your enemies as if they were precious jewels, because it's your enemies that build your tolerance and patience on the road to your enlightenment.
that hit me so hard, telling these people that had been through this experience.
and this is a little girl.
and when i gave them to the people, they'd either hold them to their heart, or they'd hold them up to their head and just stay there.
and he still is holding this line.
this is another leader of his people.
and in this period of time -- since that time -- as much oil, or twice as much oil as was spilled in the exxon valdez accident, was spilled in this little area of the amazon, and the tribes in this area have constantly had to move.
and the knowledge that these people have about the natural environment is incredible.
and her tribe has had to move three times in the last 10 years because of the oil spills.
and we never hear about that.
and these people are the people who take the brunt of it.
i wish they would just go away.
so it was a great experience for him.
and then we went up and met their shaman.
and we watched and stayed with john doolikahn.
but around the world, they go into trance in different ways, and in pakistan, the way they do it is they burn juniper leaves and they sacrifice an animal, pour the blood of the animal on the leaves and then inhale the smoke.
and they're all praying to the mountain gods as they go into trance.
the one i want to show you -- after we get them to make the movies, we have a night where we show the movies to the community.
and this is a study that was just done a couple of years ago.
i thought i would think about changing your perspective on the world a bit, and showing you some of the designs that we have in nature.
and so one of the questions that i asked you is, when you look around, what do you see?
and so the question is: how did that material get here?
how did it get into the form that it had before it got reshaped, and so forth?
so one of the things i look at is, how did the universe begin and shape?
what was the whole process in the creation and the evolution of the universe to getting to the point that we have these kinds of materials?
if you look at this picture, what you will see is a lot of dark with some light objects in it.
the sun is eight minutes ago.
but you go and look to the center of the galaxy, it's thousands of years ago.
but if we were capable to come up with an idea of how to look even further -- there's some things even further, and that was what i did in a lot of my work, was to develop the techniques -- we could look out back to even earlier epochs before there were stars and before there were galaxies, back to when the universe was hot and dense and very different.
you see the whole big picture?
and that will be the sequence of understanding the very beginning of the universe.
and somewhere around this period is when our solar system started forming.
how are you going to put galaxies out there in a pattern like that?
how are you going to end up doing that?
and we had to add one more thing to make the universe come out right.
and the stuff that is in the yellow color, that is the ordinary kind of matter that's turned into stars and galaxies.
notice this pattern and pay attention to this pattern.
so we live in the boonies.
and so i forgot to tell you the scale.
so it takes light three billion years to travel over that distance.
and so you know when you first saw this picture, it didn't mean quite so much to you.
so i'm going to show you one that can be run on a desktop in two days in the next picture.
and this is a simple one, because it doesn't have the ordinary matter and it just has the dark matter in it.
but the distances on the universe are so large and the time scales are so large that it takes a long time for this to form.
you can kind of see that.
give you a different view about what the design and what everything else looks like.
when is the last time you did absolutely nothing for 10 whole minutes?
so with that in mind, i'd like you just to take a moment to think, when did you last take any time to do nothing?
so i was about 11 when i went along to my first meditation class.
my own way of dealing with it was to become a monk.
people often ask me what i learned from that time.
but it was more than that.
it taught me -- it gave me a greater appreciation, an understanding for the present moment.
by that i mean not being lost in thought, not being distracted, not being overwhelmed by difficult emotions, but instead learning how to be in the here and now, how to be mindful, how to be present.
i think the present moment is so underrated.
it sounds so ordinary, and yet we spend so little time in the present moment that it's anything but ordinary.
and the beauty of it is that even though it need only take about 10 minutes a day, it impacts our entire life.
but we need to know how to do it.
we need a framework to learn how to be more mindful.
but we also need to know how to approach it in the right way to get the best from it.
at other times, we might take our foot off the gas a little bit too much, and things just become a sort of little bit like this.
we do this all the time, even on an everyday level.
and we just keep telling ourselves, and we do it all the time.
and it's only in learning to watch the mind in this way that we can start to let go of those storylines and patterns of mind.
but when you sit down and you watch the mind in this way, you might see many different patterns.
don't be surprised if you feel a bit agitated in your body when you sit down to do nothing and your mind feels like that.
we can't change every little thing that happens to us in life, but we can change the way that we experience it.
all you need to do is to take 10 minutes out a day to step back, to familiarize yourself with the present moment so that you get to experience a greater sense of focus, calm and clarity in your life.
as we expect more from technology, do we expect less from each other?
and so there you have it.
actually that reminder of my daughter brings me to the beginning of my story.
1996, when i gave my first tedtalk, rebecca was five years old and she was sitting right there in the front row.
i had just written a book that celebrated our life on the internet and i was about to be on the cover of wired magazine.
and, as a psychologist, what excited me most was the idea that we would use what we learned in the virtual world about ourselves, about our identity, to live better lives in the real world.
people talk to me about the important new skill of making eye contact while you're texting.
but then these same children deny each other their full attention.
this is a recent shot of my daughter and her friends being together while not being together.
we remove ourselves from our grief or from our revery and we go into our phones.
we're getting used to a new way of being alone together.
they want to go in and out of all the places they are because the thing that matters most to them is control over where they put their attention.
so you want to go to that board meeting, but you only want to pay attention to the bits that interest you.
but you can end up hiding from each other, even as we're all constantly connected to each other.
i think i should want to, but actually i'd rather just do things on my blackberry."
and we clean them up with technology.
i believe this wish reflects a painful truth that i've learned in the past 15 years.
that feeling that no one is listening to me is very important in our relationships with technology.
and the feeling that no one is listening to me make us want to spend time with machines that seem to care about us.
have we so lost confidence that we will be there for each other?
and one day i came in and a woman who had lost a child was talking to a robot in the shape of a baby seal.
it seemed to be looking in her eyes.
it seemed to be following the conversation.
and many people found this amazing.
but that woman was trying to make sense of her life with a machine that had no experience of the arc of a human life.
people experience pretend empathy as though it were the real thing.
but when i stepped back, i felt myself at the cold, hard center of a perfect storm.
we are not so much in control.
just think of people at a checkout line or at a red light.
being alone feels like a problem that needs to be solved.
and so people try to solve it by connecting.
but in the process, we set ourselves up to be isolated.
solitude is where you find yourself so that you can reach out to other people and form real attachments.
we slip into thinking that always being connected is going to make us fell less alone.
find ways to demonstrate this as a value to your children.
do the same thing at work.
we have everything we need to start.
we spend an evening on the social network instead of going to the pub with friends.
but that was true back in the 30s, so i understood that.
i thought about that for quite a spell, and i wanted to come up with my own definition.
so i wanted to come up with something of my own.
and i recalled -- i was raised on a small farm in southern indiana and dad tried to teach me and my brothers that you should never try to be better than someone else.
never try to be better than someone else, always learn from others.
if you get too engrossed and involved and concerned in regard to the things over which you have no control, it will adversely affect the things over which you have control.
and i think that character is much more important than what you are perceived to be.
well, that was my idea that i was going to try to get across to the youngsters.
there are some things that helped me, i think, be better than i would have been.
but i think i'm better than i would have been if i hadn't run across certain things.
and i tried to use that more or less in my teaching, whether it be in sports, or whether it be in the english classroom.
i love poetry and always had an interest in that somehow.
and about the same time i ran across this one verse, i ran across another one.
someone asked a lady teacher why she taught.
and i may say, i may not see the church, or hear the word or eat the food their hands may grow.
and that gives you a great deal of pleasure, to see them go on.
so that was the ideas that i tried to get across to the youngsters under my supervision.
there was a time when i made them wear jackets and shirts and ties.
so i let them -- just they had to be neat and clean.
he came to catch the bus; we were leaving for somewhere to play.
he had to go home and get cleaned up to get to the airport.
i believe you should be on time.
and that's not good, for a young married man to go home in a bad mood.
and another one i had was, not one word of profanity.
one word of profanity, and you are out of here for the day.
if i see it in a game, you're going to come out and sit on the bench.
i used to tell them i was paid to do that.
those were three things that i stuck with pretty closely all the time.
and those actually came from my dad.
that's what he tried to teach me and my brothers at one time.
you have to have patience to -- we want things to happen.
they think all change is progress.
and we forget there is no progress without change.
and i believe that we must have faith.
i think our tendency is to hope that things will turn out the way we want them to much of the time.
but we don't do the things that are necessary to make those things become reality.
i worked on this for some 14 years, and i think it helped me become a better teacher.
you'd be surprised how many also told him that that was one more than he had in his head at various times.
but he wrote something that i think he did while i tried to do in this pyramid.
for who can ask more of a man than giving all within his span.
it's you and i who make our fates -- we open up or close the gates on the road ahead or the road behind."
and no one can do more than that.
and i just wanted them to be able to hold their head up after a game.
not necessary to what you would want them to be, but they will be about what they should, and only you will know whether you can do that.
and that's what i wanted from them more than anything else.
and as time went by, and i learned more about other things, i think it worked a little better, as far as the results.
i'd want one to realize that defense usually wins championships, and would work hard on defense.
i wanted them to be able to shoot from the outside.
i wanted them to be good inside too.
not the only one, but he was one that i used in that particular category, because i think he made the effort to become the best [unclear].
two players that gave me great satisfaction; that came as close as i think anyone i ever had to reach their full potential: one was conrad burke.
and you know one of them was a starting player for a season and a half.
so this is now a public health crisis.
it really involves many different areas.
and that really has to do to many different challenges.
but if i were to point to three challenges, the first one is actually the design of materials that could go in your body and do well over time.
we could not get enough of your cells to grow outside of your body.
so they know what to do.
two weeks later, you have something that looks like a liver.
and we now have been able just to show the creation of human liver tissue just this past month using this technology.
because in reality, what you want to do is you actually want to have the patient on the bed with the wound, and you have a scanner, basically like a flatbed scanner.
this is how it actually works.
and we actually do this with a gel so that you can lift the gel material.
so once those cells are on the patient they will stick where they need to be.
and this actually shows that printing.
it takes about seven hours to print a kidney, so this is about three hours into it now.
so this is actually a new generation.
in reality, we now have a long history of doing this.
i couldn't go out and play basketball at recess without feeling like i was going to pass out when i got back inside.
so after the surgery, life got a lot better for me.
i was able to do more things.
i became the captain of the team, and that was great.
i was able to be a normal kid with my friends.
i went through about 16 surgeries, and it seemed impossible to do that when i was in kidney failure when i was 10.
and this surgery came along and basically made me who i am today and saved my life.
i know i was one of the first 10 people to have this surgery.
all i wanted to do was to get better, and i didn't realize how amazing it really was until now that i'm older and i see the amazing things that he's doing.
there were a couple that were a little stubborn, but i had to talk to them.
i think it was bought for us around three years ago for a christmas present.
when you think about it, it would have seemed like a crazy idea, even a few years ago, that i would swap my stuff with a total stranger whose real name i didn't know and without any money changing hands.
we now live in a global village where we can mimic the ties that used to happen face to face, but on a scale and in ways that have never been possible before.
now, you know when you learn a new word, and then you start to see that word everywhere?
well it was a lot of noise and complexity in my head, until actually i realized it was happening because of four key drivers.
together they grow their own food.
so i want to just give you an example of how powerful collaborative consumption can be to change behaviors.
so when you consider these two facts, it starts to make a little less sense that we have to own one outright.
the results of this challenge after just one month was staggering.
i want to give you one example that shows how fast this evolution is happening.
and i was cleverly standing in the front yard when one came over the hill.
co: we walked up to the church because we heard that they had hot meals, but when we arrived we found problems.
and we need to tell people what not to bring.
so this is what filled our days.
the other point is that it is hard.
systems like the ones that we were creating on the fly could exist ahead of time.
in a disaster, however, you start with all of the interest and none of the capacity.
and you've only got about four days of interest in dallas.
all of the interest came in the first four days, but by the time they lost the news cycle, that's when the needs came in, yet they had this massive resource of what people were able to give and they've been able to meet the needs of their residents.
imagine if we could have these systems ready to go in a place before a disaster.
we're working on getting the software to places so people expect it, so people know how to use it and so it can be filled ahead of time with that microinformation that drives recovery.
they took to it immediately, and now they are forces of nature.
he takes us on a tour.
let me show you some images of what i consider to be the cities of tomorrow.
they are what i consider to be the cities of tomorrow, the new urban world.
to tell you about that i have to talk about this fellow here, his name is julius.
and i met julius the last week that i was living in kibera.
because i think it says something about reversing our perception of what we think the good life is.
it was a 10 by 10 cell.
shared it with three other men.
they couldn't have been more than five or six years old.
i thought they might be playing king of the hill, but i was wrong.
and what people do is they develop their home on one or two stories, and they sell their loggia or roof rights, and someone else builds on top of their building, and then that person sells the roof rights, and someone else builds on top of their building.
they have more things going on in them.
beer is all carried in on your shoulders.
beer is a very important thing in brazil.
people burn trash to get rid of the garbage, and they dig their own sewer channels.
and sometimes they have natural trash-disposal.
this is water going to rio.
i say there are two things.
they're most often sold to people, and people then wind up in debt and have to pay back the debt, and sometimes have to sell their property in order to pay back the debt.
and i say that because the system in turkey is notable.
the future of these communities is in the people and in our ability to work with those people.
his message of hope has never been more relevant.
i had never in my life ever tasted candy.
so i said to myself, with all these hundred other boys, this is where i belong.
every time school closed -- it was a boarding school and i was seven -- you had to travel until you find them.
and just walking, i found a man who gave me a full scholarship to the united states.
then one day, an elder gave me a story and this story went like this: long time ago, there was a big war between tribes.
but these two people worked something out.
so the blind man went down on his knees, down like this, and told the man with no legs to go over his back, and stood up.
the man on top can see, the blind man can walk.
you've got a good education from america, you have a good life in america; what are you going to do for us?
every time you go to an area where for 43 years of independence, we still don't have basic health facilities.
this is the world we live in.
and this is the world your children will live in.
most of the important and all of the creative work in this area is being funded by private philanthropies.
and i'm very aware that when you say the word "god," many people will turn off immediately.
he will protect his own people, and answer the prayers of the faithful.
but i have a problem with that.
do we really believe that god is the kind of male boss that we've been presenting in our worship and in our liturgies over all these years?
i have chosen not to rock the boat.
i had my own personal responses, but i also have a public role, and something needed to be said.
and this is what i said.
if the man in the photograph that appeared in the newspapers, holding the hand of his dead child was standing in front of us now, there are no words that we could say to him.
some have concluded that we can only believe in a god who shares our pain.
in some way the eternal god must be able to enter into the souls of human beings and experience the torment within.
and if this is true, it must also be that god knows the joy and exaltation of the human spirit, as well.
we want a god who can weep with those who weep, and rejoice with those who rejoice.
who is god in all this?"
so we have a suffering god -- a god who is intimately connected with this world and with every living soul.
i need to ask some more questions, and i hope they are questions that you will want to ask, as well, some of you.
over the last few weeks i have been struck by the number of times that words in our worship have felt a bit inappropriate, a bit dodgy.
perhaps some of you know it.
so the first big question is about control.
does god have a plan for each of us?
does the wind and the waves obey him?
i can remember someone saying this to me, with her eyes shining with enthusiasm at this wonderful confirmation of her faith and the goodness of god.
but if god can or will do these things -- intervene to change the flow of events -- then surely he could have stopped the tsunami.
either god is responsible for the tsunami, or god is not in control.
then there was the congregation who had left their usual church building on the shore to hold a service in the hills.
afterwards someone said that god must have been looking after them.
so the next question is about partiality.
a cosmic us and them, and a god who is guilty of the worst kind of favoritism?
that would be appalling, and that would be the point at which i would hand in my membership.
we are still left with a god who can do the tsunami and allow auschwitz.
we cannot afford to pay so much for admission.
it is not god that i do not accept.
is god intimately involved in our suffering, so that he feels it in his own being?
we must think again about god.
the people knew their god by his mighty acts.
what if god is in things?
the loving soul of the universe.
what if god is in things?
in the natural cycle of life and death, the creation and destruction that must happen continuously.
and how would we live such a faith?
how would i live such a faith?
in music and poetry, in the natural world of beauty and in the small ordinary things of life, there is a deep, indwelling presence that makes them extraordinary.
when i stood up to speak to my people about god and the tsunami, i had no answers to offer them.
only doubts and questioning and uncertainty.
i have not slept in weeks.
so i would walk around in a daze during the day.
my mom was a teacher, my sister became a teacher and after college so many of my friends went into teaching.
but i knew so many of the things they were up against, so many of the struggles they were dealing with.
and one of them was that so many of my friends that were teaching in city schools were having trouble with their students keeping up at grade level, in their reading and writing in particular.
and so we started talking about this.
the students flow in and you put down what you're doing, or you trade, or you work a little bit later or whatever it is.
you give those hours in the afternoon to the students in the neighborhood.
and so this is what we did.
and this is a vat that we fill with treasures that students dig in.
that was just my one thing -- i said we had to have something that drops on people's heads.
it was started with about 12 of my friends, people that i had known for years that were writers in the neighborhood.
immediately, she made the inroads with the teachers and the parents and the students and everything, and so suddenly it was actually full every day.
and what we were trying to offer every day was one-on-one attention.
and we found ourselves full every day with kids.
but there was something psychological happening there that was just a little bit different.
they can lean over, ask a question of one of these adults and it all sort of feeds on each other.
and that makes a happy family.
so the key to it all is homework!
this is one of the classes getting way too excited about writing.
so this is one of the books that they do.
the teachers that we work with -- and everything is different to teachers -- they tell us what to do.
the teachers are going to tell us how we're most useful."
whoever can make it signs up.
they go in about a half an hour before the class.
so then we're able to work with thousands and thousands of more students.
i want them to write about how to achieve peace in a violent world."
we had a big party at the end.
this is a book that you can find anywhere.
we sell all the student books.
so it was paying the rent.
it was making a lot of money.
and people would come in and learn more about it.
this is a field trip going on.
it was open to the public.
it was right in the neighborhood that it was serving, and it was open all the time to the public.
because they have to do it hand on heart and everything.
these are some of the products.
you can see it there in the middle next to all the grappling hooks.
it opens and then this is the tutoring center in the back.
so you can see the full effect!
i know that so many people in this room are already doing really interesting things.
i know that for a fact.
always let the teachers lead the way.
they will tell you how to be useful.
so you go to the website, you see a bunch of ideas you can be inspired by and then you add your own projects once you get started.
i want to talk about my investigations into what technology means in our lives -- not just our immediate life, but in the cosmic sense, in the kind of long history of the world and our place in the world: what is this stuff?
and so, i want to kind of go through my little story of what i found out.
and one of the first things that i started to investigate was the history of the name of technology.
and each one of those is really kind of summing up the most important things for the united states at that time.
if you search for the word "technology," it was not used until 1952.
i actually did research to find out the first use of the word "technology."
it actually goes way back, and what i want to suggest is it goes a long way back.
and the same thing with the hunter-gatherer tribes and early man is that you didn't live beyond the age of 30.
how much learning can you do?
it was a very short life.
but at the same time anthropologists know that most hunter-gatherer tribes of the world, with that very little technology, actually did not spend a very long time gathering the food that they needed: three to six hours a day.
because they had banker hours basically.
the other thing that the early man invented was fire.
all the things that we see today that are changing our lives, we can always trace back to the introduction of some new technology.
and of course cities are ways to make things more useful to us.
while this is something that comes from our mind, it also has its roots deeply into the cosmos.
where does this order come from?
other people have come up with 10,000.
we have confusion about what we should think about a new technology.
i think that really leads nowhere.
and what i mean by that is that we find a new job for it.
so, our job as humans is to parent our mind children, to find them good friends, to find them a good job.
there are no bad technologies, just as there are no bad children.
we just have to find them the right place.
and we are aware of the price.
in war we often see only the frontline stories of soldiers and combat.
i woke up in the middle of the night with the sound of heavy explosion.
i do not remember what time it was.
i just remember the sound was so heavy and so very shocking.
i thought it was just like the movies, but the movies had not conveyed them in the powerful image that i was seeing full of bright red and orange and gray, and a full circle of explosion.
and i kept on staring at it until it disappeared.
i went back to my bed, and i prayed, and i secretly thanked god that that missile did not land on my family's home, that it did not kill my family that night.
his mother showed up the next week at my brother's classroom and begged seven-year-old kids to share with her any picture they may have of her son, for she had lost everything.
i am another image and vision of another survivor of war.
we only talk about one side of it.
but there's another side that i have witnessed as someone who lived in it and someone who ended up working in it.
we have been only seeing one side of war.
this is the language of sterility.
we are missing stories of women who are literally keeping life going in the midst of wars.
do you know -- do you know that people fall in love in war and go to school and go to factories and hospitals and get divorced and go dancing and go playing and live life going?
and the ones who are keeping that life are women.
there are two sides of war.
there is a side that thinks that peace is the end of fighting, and there is a side that thinks that peace is the arrival of schools and jobs.
there is a side that is led by men, and there is a side that is led by women.
and in order for us to understand how do we build lasting peace, we must understand war and peace from both sides.
we must have a full picture of what that means.
many women were taken as slaves by rebels and soldiers, as sexual slaves who were forced also to carry the ammunition and the water and the food for the soldiers.
we need to understand that we cannot actually have negotiations of ending of wars or peace without fully including women at the negotiating table.
i find it amazing that the only group of people who are not fighting and not killing and not pillaging and not burning and not raping, and the group of people who are mostly -- though not exclusively -- who are keeping life going in the midst of war, are not included in the negotiating table.
and last, but not least, we need to invest in peace and women, not only because it is the right thing to do, not only because it is the right thing to do, for all of us to build sustainable and lasting peace today, but it is for the future.
we helped her get a job.
she was sending them to school.
i worry that my children have hate in their hearts, and when they want to grow up, they want to fight again the killers of their father and their brother."
that mother has a better chance to heal her children than any peace agreement can do.
there are lots of good news.
to start with, these women that i told you about are dancing and singing every single day, and if they can, who are we not to dance?
they are women who are standing on their feet in spite of their circumstances, not because of it.
when the soul lies down in that grass, the world is too full to talk about.
let us make this field a much bigger place.
let us all meet in that field.
what a great way to start.
what would that be like on a beach?
so we love this kind of stuff.
i had a lot of titles.
as a child, we used to wake up at 1 a.m.
it was the best advice i ever got.
this is a sad thing, but it's actually a happy thing in a way, because you can remember them in their pure form.
because the human thing is very hard when you're at mit.
and because of that, i always wondered about this human thing.
it used to be kind of two to one.
and so i made a lot of these types of things.
i feel kind of bad about that.
she has this show right now at moma, where some of these early works are here on display at moma, on the walls.
what if i make like a car crash test?"
so i have a crash test.
i was looking for some kind of form, and in the end, i made 100 butter-fries.
people ask me how they make the antenna.
i can come into work everyday and staple five pieces of paper and just stare at it with my latte.
there are ten laws and three keys.
this book i wrote because i want to figure out life.
and i just love to see the world.
the world is an amazing place.
by being at ted, we see so many things at one time.
and i can't help but enjoy looking at everything in the world.
and so, this whole thing has struck me as exciting to be here, because life is finite.
i think wisdom always goes up.
and this is an amazing experience for me as well.
i have given the slide show that i gave here two years ago about 2,000 times.
perhaps we should say the same thing about optimism.
but, as important as it is to change the lightbulbs, it is more important to change the laws.
i have been trying to tell this story for a long time.
i was reminded of that recently, by a woman who walked past the table i was sitting at, just staring at me as she walked past.
she was in her 70s, looked like she had a kind face.
i thought nothing of it until i saw from the corner of my eye she was walking from the opposite direction, also just staring at me.
and there are lots of those.
i thought i would start with the logo.
the extra amount that disappeared last fall was equivalent to this much.
the amount remaining could be completely gone in summer in as little as five years.
this is a town in newfoundland.
they have exactly the same amount of carbon.
the developing countries are now following us and accelerating their pace.
if the wealthy countries were completely missing from the picture, we would still have this crisis.
but we have given to the developing countries the technologies and the ways of thinking that are creating the crisis.
and the good news is that we can.
but responses can actually make a huge difference in the poor countries.
this is a proposal that has been talked about a lot in europe.
this is not pie in the sky; this can be done.
we need to do it for our own economy.
the latest figures show that the old model is not working.
there are a lot of great investments that you can make.
and it is based on an old model.
and we trained 250 people to give the slide show in every town and village and city in australia.
we now have a culture of distraction.
and that gave women the right to vote.
how many generations in all of human history have had the opportunity to rise to a challenge that is worthy of our best efforts?
a challenge that can pull from us more than we knew we could do?
and i think that all three have also been responsible in putting forward plans and proposals.
changing that pattern requires a scope, a scale, a speed of change that is beyond what we have done in the past.
and we have to change that.
but i do believe that between now and november, it is possible.
ag: i have prayed that i would be able to find the answer to that question.
so we have to have a change in consciousness.
but what we're going to talk about today is really design.
the world that i decided to focus on this particular time is the world of science and the world of technology.
if you think about your life today, you go every day through many different scales, many different changes of rhythm and pace.
we all know it, and we do it kind of automatically.
other people are not as elastic.
i can't get my father in italy to work on the internet.
the rca is really quite an amazing school from that viewpoint.
you know that already you can grow meat in vitro.
something that you know can be done already is to grow bone tissue, so that you can make a wedding ring out of the bone tissue of your loved one -- literally.
so, we'll be able to really not have any excuse to be wearing everything leather in the future.
you see here the work of ben fry.
it was a beautiful visualization that he did for seed magazine.
so the idea of collective design is something that will become even bigger in the future, and this is chosen as an example.
you can be in the subway and you can be completely isolated and have your own room in your ipod.
and this is called blind date.
it started out in the '80s, but at the beginning it was machines carving out of a foam block a model that was very, very fragile, and could not have any real use.
one day it will take seven hours.
but it really is a big change.
they had a particular shape that they had to stay in.
also, we do it in order to share with other people.
you need to take one in your arms and look at it in the eyes for about five minutes before it does something.
so it's really a way to make us think more about what robots mean to us.
noam toran and "accessories for lonely men": the idea is that when you lose your loved one or you go through a bad breakup, what you miss the most are those annoying things that you used to hate when you were with the other person.
this one is something that takes away the sheets from you at night.
so it's just this idea of what we really miss in life.
and many designers have been working recently on the idea of death and mourning, and what we can do about it today with new technologies.
and that's certainly how it seemed to me when i started this project.
can you get me some information?
so i had to think a little harder.
and i was watching the news one night in oxford.
all this noise around us actually has information.
so this is exactly what i did.
we brought these guys together and we started to try and solve this.
we did it in three steps.
the first step we did was to collect.
and once we had this we could start doing some cool stuff.
we did this exact same thing for iraq.
why should there be order in war?
we thought maybe there is something special about iraq.
so we looked at a few more conflicts.
so we went a little wider.
we looked around the world at all the data we could get our hands on.
what does it tell us about these conflicts?
and we start running the numbers on this.
and it turns out there is only one solution to fight a much stronger enemy.
and that is what we think is happening.
how do we end a war like iraq?
this is what wars look like when they continue.
no one has seen this before.
and we see it grow up to the stable state the wars around the world look like.
and depending on who you ask, the surge was supposed to push it up even further.
and this tells me one of two things.
either we're back where we started and the surge has had no effect; or finally the groups have been fragmented to the extent that we can start to think about maybe moving out.
but i know that we should be looking at the structure of the insurgency to answer that question.
i love the way he sits and lies on his kennel and contemplates the great things of life.
after all, how could the world exist without god being compassionate?
and yet, on the other hand, if i didn't feel this compassion, then i feel that it would be time for me to hang up my robe and give up being a rabbi.
and these same feelings are there for all of us as we face the world.
you have to, of course, be aware of the needs of others, but you have to be aware in such a way that you can carry on with your life and be of help to people.
so part of compassion has to be an understanding of what makes people tick.
if you put too much cold water in, it will shatter.
what do you have to do?
put in a mixture of the two.
and so god put both of these possibilities into the world.
there is something more though that has to be there.
we actually have to do something about it.
so there is a connectivity, and i have to understand that -- as part of the creation, as part of me being made in the image of god.
and i have to understand that my needs sometimes have to be sublimated to other needs.
because that's how long they say it takes for this dough to become leaven.
it means it gets filled with hot air.
and that too is a basis for having compassion, for understanding our place in the world.
and they were saying that in the ancient times in the temple in jerusalem, the priests used to have bread, which they used to place into a special table in the temple in jerusalem.
takes the bread and goes home.
went on until a new rabbi came.
the rabbi came in and saw what was going on.
and he called the two of them to his office.
he looked at the rich man.
so that is the way i feel: that i can only try to approach this notion of being compassionate, of understanding that there is a connectivity, that there is a unity in this world; that i want to try and serve that unity, and that i can try and do that by understanding, i hope, trying to understand something of the pain of others; but understanding that there are limits, that people have to bear responsibility for some of the problems that come upon them; and that i have to understand that there are limits to my energy, to the giving i can give.
and then i have to try to see in what ways i can make these the hands of god.
and so try to bring compassion to life in this world.
and it's from the experience from about 20 or 25 years of doing that that i want to bring to you the message this morning, that pain is a disease.
and before i tell you about how it is that we think that happens and what we can do about it, i want to show you how it feels for my patients.
imagine what your life would be like if i were to stroke it with this feather, but your brain was telling you that this is what you are feeling -- and that is the experience of my patients with chronic pain.
this is what her arm looked like when she came to my clinic about three months after her sprain.
but the worst part was, not the spontaneous pain that was there 24 hours a day.
what can we do in a case like chandler's?
but the future is actually even brighter.
seen from another point of view, it gives quite a different impression.
but it's only when you get the whole picture you can fully understand what's going on.
so i thought that it will be good to start with it.
and also start with a little bit of statistics.
that is just to understand how big and important this problem is.
so i can go back to my story.
and you have a problem making ends meet.
and we all had all of that on tapes.
we had the ability to understand what was going on.
so if i gave you that picture, i don't want to go too long on that.
and what did i know at that time about media systems?
the big plan was to ask him for a 1,000,000-dollar loan.
and i thought that the only thing that we needed at that time was 1,000,000-dollar loan to take us through those hard times.
i gave him what i thought was a brilliant explanation of the political situation and explained how hard and difficult the war will be.
that was really the only question he had.
he left, and i remember being actually very angry at myself because i thought there must be an institution in the world that is providing loans to media companies.
i have -- i left the country, i have a meeting with george soros, trying for the third time to convince him that his foundation should invest in something that should operate like a media bank.
what you should do is you should treat media companies as a business.
see that it will not work.
i knew two things after that meeting.
and second, that i have no idea how to make it work.
so i had absolutely no idea how that could actually work.
had the wrong idea; i thought that we can be a bank.
you give them more money; they repay you that over a time.
you collect interest and do nothing in between.
they come to us with a request for a loan.
they want to -- the only way for them to survive is to get a printing press.
we were the best that they could do.
we do it in 17 countries of the developing world.
but what is most important here is, who do we finance?
i'll bet half of you have never heard of that place.
after two years working with us, he becomes the most respected newspaper in that small place.
governor comes to him one day, actually invites him to come to his office.
he goes and sees the governor.
and i want to offer you a deal.
i will not run, but it's very important for me who is going to succeed me.
so give me the paper for nine months.
i have no interest in being in media business.
so what the governor got was an empty shell.
so it sounds like a great story.
we started our media lab, sounds like a real great story.
so from that perspective, what we did is just really one drop in the sea of that need that we can identify.
now ours is just one story.
here is where the problem is, and i'll explain to you as well as i can what the problem is.
imagine that this third of this room is filled with people who represent different foundations.
now that is how difficult it is to match people from this side of the room with people of that side of the room.
instead of all of that we thought there is -- something new needs to be invented.
you can bring it to asia.
you can, once you have all of those different points, you can make it easy for investors.
put all of those bonds at one place and they sit down and click.
once you have more than 10 of them you have to develop some kind of a matrix.
now take it to the last step.
and in that way you organize the financing so there are no dark rooms, no blind people running around to find each other.
i want to talk to you about something kind of big.
we all live here in boulder.
we know it was that big because of the impact it had and the crater it left.
and since this came in on a friday, they were able to get this great footage of this thing breaking up as it came in over west virgina, maryland, pennsylvania and new jersey until it did that to a car in new york.
now this thing was probably about the size of a school bus when it first came in.
but it turns out, you don't need something six miles across to do a lot of damage.
to give you a sense of scale, this is about a mile wide.
it turns out that these things don't have to hit the ground to do a lot of damage.
this did a huge amount of damage.
if one of these things were to hit pretty much anywhere, it would cause a panic.
but if it came over a city, an important city -- not that any city is more important than others, but some of them we depend on them more on the global economic basis -- that could do a huge amount of damage to us as a civilization.
what can we do about this?
the first thing we have to do is find them.
this is an image of an asteroid that passed us in 2009.
i don't even know if you can see that in the back row.
we have to find these things first.
the second step is that we see one heading toward us, we have to stop it.
this thing was discovered just a few years ago and could hit us a few years from now.
that means we can do it again.
and there are a lot of other problems with that.
now we have three years to do something else.
and you can hit it again.
if we see an asteroid that's going to hit the earth and we have enough time, we can hit it to move it into a better orbit.
but then what we do is we launch a probe that has to weigh a ton or two.
we have the ability to change our future.
what happens to matter if you chop it up very fine?
we know a lot about four forces.
and why on earth could that be so?
why should it work, and is this something to do with human beings?
i'll let you in on the answer to the last one that i offer, and that is, it has nothing to do with human beings.
would they really have different laws?
i think there are laws out there, and we of course don't understand them at any given time very well -- but we try.
and we try to get closer and closer.
we may not even be terribly far from it.
but even if we don't run across it in our lifetimes, we can still think there is one out there, and we're just trying to get closer and closer to it.
there are even movies about it with a lot of wrong stuff.
so what that means is that the history of the universe is not determined just by the fundamental law.
and the kind of mathematics that we had for the previous skin is almost the same as what we need for the next skin.
but you can just look at the form.
you can look at the form.
and it gave a very beautiful description of the strong force and of the weak force.
one thing he was thinking of is something that most of us take for granted today, but in his day it wasn't taken for granted.
that the force that causes the apple to fall to the ground is the same force that causes the planets and the moon to move around, and so on?
and he could have written quite an essay on "what i did over my summer vacation."
you don't need something more in order to get something more.
then she shares a moving memory of her own father, and of their shared love of baseball.
he somehow had to escape that hard-scrabble farm from which he was born.
but he read books in every spare moment he could find.
but there were so many losses in his early life that he was haunted by death.
moreover, when his mother lay dying, she did not hold out for him the hope that they would meet in an afterworld.
as a result he became obsessed with the thought that when we die our life is swept away -- dust to dust.
and that worthy ambition became his lodestar.
it carried him through the one significant depression that he suffered when he was in his early 30s.
he had broken his engagement with mary todd, not certain he was ready to marry her, but knowing how devastating it was to her that he did that.
he said that, "i would just as soon die right now, but i've not yet done anything to make any human being remember that i have lived."
i need them by my side."
and with a beauty of language -- almost as if the shakespeare and the poetry he had so loved as a child had worked their way into his very soul.
but as he was about to put his signature on the proclamation his own hand was numb and shaking because he had shaken a thousand hands that morning at a new year's reception.
so he put the pen down.
so he waited until he could take up the pen and sign with a bold and clear hand.
knowing that tolstoy was in their midst, they asked him to tell stories of the great men of history.
we want to hear about that man who spoke with a voice of thunder, who laughed like the sunrise, who came from that place called america, which is so far from here, that if a young man should travel there, he would be an old man when he arrived.
he told them everything he could about lincoln.
i was selected as a white house fellow when i was 24 years old.
we had a big dance at the white house.
not that peculiar -- there were only three women out of the 16 white house fellows.
but he did whisper in my ear that he wanted me to work directly for him in the white house.
but it was not to be that simple.
so i was certain he would kick me out of the program.
so i did end up working for him in the white house.
i like to believe it was because i was a good listener.
so i think that part of his attraction for me was that i loved listening to his tall tales.
but i also worried that part of it was that i was then a young woman.
everything was working perfectly, until one day he said he wanted to discuss our relationship.
and because he was so sad and so vulnerable, he opened up to me in ways he never would have had i known him at the height of his power -- sharing his fears, his sorrows and his worries.
he had servants to answer any whim, and he had a family who loved him deeply.
it was almost as if the hole in his heart was so large that even the love of a family, without work, could not fill it.
he spoke with immense sadness in his voice, saying maybe he should have spent more time with his children, and their children in turn.
so deep, for instance, was abraham lincoln's love of shakespeare, that he made time to spend more than a hundred nights in the theater, even during those dark days of the war.
he would stand with his back against a fire and entertain the crowd for hours with his winding tales.
and all these stories became part of his memory bank, so he could call on them whenever he needed to.
and they're not quite what you might expect from our marble monument.
but he came out of the outhouse not upset at all.
in my own life, i shall always be grateful for having found a form of play in my irrational love of baseball.
which allows me, from the beginning of spring training to the end of the fall, to have something to occupy my mind and heart other than my work.
but he made me feel i was telling him a fabulous story.
so i finally learned you had to tell a story from beginning to middle to end.
but it so happened he was speaking in a protestant church.
when you are brought up as a catholic, you think that if you ever set foot in a protestant church, you'll be struck dead at the threshold.
but as i left that night, i was certain that somehow i'd traded the life of my everlasting soul for this one night with roy campanella.
so i had this sin on my soul when i went to my first confession.
i told the priest right away.
and then came my second sin.
and i had to say, every night when i said my prayers.
you do not need to wish harm on others to make it happen."
i must say there is magic in these moments.
when i open my eyes and i see my sons in the place where my father once sat, i feel an invisible loyalty and love linking my sons to the grandfather whose face they never had a chance to see, but whose heart and soul they have come to know through all the stories i have told.
allowing me to learn from these large figures about the struggle for meaning for life.
allowing me to believe that the private people we have loved and lost in our families, and the public figures we have respected in our history, just as abraham lincoln wanted to believe, really can live on, so long as we pledge to tell and to retell the stories of their lives.
and as you can see, it's been knocked about a bit, which is not surprising because it was made two and a half thousand years ago and was dug up in 1879.
and it's an object with fascinating stories and stories that are by no means over yet.
and the great gold vessels of the temple in jerusalem had been taken to babylon.
and in order to make it even more exciting, he added a bit of sacrilege to the rest of the fun, and he brings out the temple vessels.
they were allowed to return to jerusalem and to rebuild the temple.
who is there among you of his people?
the lord god be with him, and let him go up.'"
it was the largest empire the world had known until then.
and it had to be run in a quite new way.
it had to be run in different languages.
all of those are respected by cyrus.
it left a dream of the middle east as a unit, and a unit where people of different faiths could live together.
and it enters now another story.
it enters that great debate in the middle of the 19th century: are the scriptures reliable?
we only knew about the return of the jews and the decree of cyrus from the hebrew scriptures.
and great excitement to a world where those who believed in the scriptures had had their faith in creation shaken by evolution, by geology, here was evidence that the scriptures were historically true.
and this is why we should all be grateful to and worship marduk.
and the cyrus cylinder comes back into public view and the text of this as a demonstration of why what is going to happen after the war is over in 1918 is part of a divine plan.
this is the other side of that same picture.
in new york this autumn, it will be present when the great debates about the future of the middle east take place.
and i want to finish by asking you what the next story will be in which this object figures.
after all, where else would we put all of those children who don't have any parents?
it happens so naturally in most families that we don't even notice it.
and it's only when it goes wrong that we start to realize the importance of families to children.
it was hard to believe there were any children there at all, yet the director showed me into room after room, each containing row upon row of cots, in each of which lay a child staring into space.
in a room of 40 newborns, not one of them was crying.
the children must be woken at 7 and fed at 7:30.
but why are there so many orphans in europe when there hasn't been a great deal of war or disaster in recent years?
it's also much cheaper to provide support to families than it is to provide institutions.
if we know people who are planning to support orphanages, we should convince them to support family services instead.
together, this is the one form of child abuse that we could eradicate in our lifetime.
i was basically concerned about what was going on in the world.
making sense of those things is a very difficult thing to do.
i was bottom of the class.
i was told i was dyslexic.
and so concern is where all of this comes from.
and then, being an actor, i was doing these different kinds of things, and i felt the content of the work that i was involved in really wasn't cutting it, that there surely had to be more.
maybe i could become a filmmaker.
maybe i can use the form of film constructively to in some way make a difference.
so i started thinking about peace, and i was obviously, as i said to you, very much moved by these images, trying to make sense of that.
could i go and speak to older and wiser people who would tell me how they made sense of the things that are going on?
and if i took that journey, no matter whether it failed or succeeded, it would be completely irrelevant.
is the destruction of the world inevitable?
is that a responsible thing to do?
and that was when i had the idea.
there was no starting point for peace.
and we started writing letters to everybody.
you very quickly work out what is it that you've got to do to fathom that out.
he was a prisoner of war.
he died when i was 11.
so he was like my hero.
and the reason why 21 was the number is 700 men left, 23 came back, two died on the boat and 21 hit the ground.
and we started to build this case.
and i remember the first letter.
i'd love to talk to you about the first ever day of peace."
could you give me a flight?
and of course, we went and saw him and it was amazing.
and that was kind of like the launch of this thing.
they used to say the pen is mightier than the sword.
and just staying in the moment with it was a beautiful thing and really empowering actually.
and here you see people like mary robinson, i went to see in geneva.
i met mandela at the arusha peace talks, and so on and so on and so on -- while i was building the case to prove whether this idea would make sense.
and then we were listening to the people.
i'm really clear about how young people feel when you talk to them about this idea of having a starting point for their actions for a more peaceful world through their poetry, their art, their literature, their music, their sport, whatever it might be.
and we were listening to everybody.
and this young child who'd taken about an inch and a half out of her leg with no antiseptic, and that young boy who was a child soldier, who told me he'd killed people -- he was about 12 -- these things made me realize that this was not a film that i could just stop.
and then on the seventh of september, i was invited to new york.
and thank you to all of them.
i was at the top of the general assembly just looking down into it and seeing it happen.
and i was waiting for him to come down, and i knew that he was on his way.
and we have to make this day work.
but we have to continue this journey, and we have to tell people, and we have to prove it can work."
and that was even worse than actually what had just happened in many ways, because it couldn't not work.
and so i went back to the united nations.
and i went back to the u.n.
and so i went back to london, and i went and saw this chap, jude law.
and i saw him because he was an actor, i was an actor, i had a connection to him, because we needed to get to the press, we needed this attraction, we needed the media to be involved.
because if we start pumping it up a bit maybe more people would listen and there'd be more -- when we got into certain areas, maybe there would be more people interested.
and i could sort of see a little look in his eye of interest.
it would help and bring attention.
and that attention would help leverage the situation, as well as all of the other sides of it."
you have to get out and work."
there was an interest in what was going on.
we had to wait now and see what happened.
and i got home, and i remember one of the team bringing in a letter to me from the taliban.
we see it as a window of opportunity.
and so then we wrapped the film up and we put it together because we had to go back.
we went back to afghanistan, because the next year was coming, and we wanted to support.
they were saying they would stop.
and then there was this other statement that came out from the u.n.
and that completely blew my mind almost more than anything.
and i was there thinking about what was going on.
and i kept thinking about this 70 percent.
and it's in the six official languages of the united nations.
and you can see the education box there.
and i sat with him a few weeks ago.
is it really possible that we could do this?"
and it then made me think about a glass of water, which is clear.
i want to tell you some stories that explain my view.
twice she was involved in surgeries where they lost power at the hospital.
the first time it was a c-section.
now what does this have to do with leadership?
and we need to train them right.
and they asked me to join a crowd of people that were running up and down this embankment.
because the path i had taken was considered out of bounds.
i was very worried about what my peers at school might think if they saw me running up and down this hill.
i was especially concerned of what the girls might think.
and so i started to argue with these men.
what lessons would you take from an experience like this?
it was important not to look at those guns.
and i also learned that it can be helpful to think about girls.
they wanted us to think critically.
they wanted us to be analytical.
but i didn't really fully understand what had happened to me at swarthmore.
and i was part of that.
these things were provided by institutions run by the people that i call leaders.
because i realized that the state of the african continent would matter to my children and their children.
and it seemed to me that that was the wrong direction, and i needed to be back helping.
this was not the world that i'd want my children to grow up in.
so i decided to get engaged, and the first thing that i did was to come back to ghana and talk with a lot of people and really try to understand what the real issues were.
now, i was a little scared because when you see those three problems, they seem really hard to deal with.
what is it about ghana that produces leaders that are unethical or unable to solve problems?"
so i went to look at what was happening in our educational system.
i think it would make a huge difference.
but i was moved almost to tears because i understood what was happening to this young man.
and it is an awesome thing to be a part of empowering someone in this way.
one of the students asked a question that just warmed my heart.
i don't know whether they will decide to have this honor code.
these young future leaders are beginning to understand the real business of leadership, the real privilege of leadership, which is after all to serve humanity.
i am even more thrilled by the fact that least year our student body elected a woman to be the head of student government.
it's the first time in the history of ghana that a woman has been elected head of student government at any university.
it says a lot about her.
and it gives me a lot of hope.
and every single one of them has been placed.
and it is my contention that the manner in which we train our leaders will make all the difference.
i work for the red cross and i'm a physical therapist.
it took quite many years for the program to become what it is now.
today, i would like to tell you a story, the story of a big change, and the story of the people who made this change possible.
this is the place where we make the legs.
at that time i found myself in a strange situation.
i felt not quite ready for that job.
there was so much to learn.
there were so many things new to me.
there were many other things to do.
so i stopped the car and i went to help.
the man was without legs and only with one arm.
so i took him into a safe place.
we will provide you with a pair of legs."
who is going to make the legs for him?"
so i hoped that he would not come.
and i spoke with a gatekeeper.
at least we can start repairing the prostheses, the broken prostheses of the people and maybe try to do something for people like mahmoud."
we have other things to do."
when you have 20 people in front of you, looking at you and you are the one who has to decide ...
so we started doing some repairs.
believe me, i was worried because i was breaking the rules.
i was doing something that i was not supposed to do.
maybe some of them are here now.
i was working, i was going everyday to work for the homeless.
a couple of times i crossed the front line in the very place where mahmoud and his son were crossing.
no need of staying with me all the day pushing my wheelchair."
and i will never forget mahmoud and his son walking together pushing the empty wheelchair.
but i understood he wanted to tell me something.
and he was standing in front of me, his head down.
i thought, how much money do i have in my pocket?
just to give him some money.
and then he added something i will never forget for the rest of my life.
only one week -- one week try and not a single day more.
and then i asked for verification.
i understood that i was wrong again.
we decided to employ as many disabled as possible to train them in any possible job.
and you should see the faces of these people when they realize that those assisting them are like them.
and then the surprise turns into hope.
and it's easy for me as well to train someone who has already passed through the experience of disability.
scraps of men do not exist.
there is always a better way to do things.
there are plenty of countries at war like afghanistan.
it is possible and it is not difficult.
well now you should see me.
i never miss a single training session.
and you should see me during the match.
i shout like a true italian.
what is going to be the next change?
i call myself a body architect.
a maybe that could take the form of a gas or a liquid.
or the way that we attract sexual partners?
it completely blows apart the way that perfume is, and provides a whole new format.
that distance is really important because it tells us how much light the planet receives overall.
and that distance and knowing that amount of light is important because it's a little like you or i sitting around a campfire: you want to be close enough to the campfire so that you're warm, but not so close that you're too toasty and you get burned.
however, there's more to know about your parent star than just how much light you receive overall.
that's the light that you can see with your own human eyes.
they also cause the light from the star to vary.
but what we can do in the meantime is measure the light from our stars and learn about this relationship between the planets and their parent stars to suss out clues about which planets might be good places to look for life in the universe.
as a matter of fact, this is something that about half of you, more than half of you will not be familiar with.
the other assumption that you made -- and this little lesson is to show you that you will make assumptions.
now why would a grown man appear before you wearing empty frames on his face?
i have to do something now, which seems a little bit strange for a magician.
i will take enough of these.
but the one thing that has made a big comeback just recently is this business of speaking with the dead.
you might agree with me on that.
now, i have two questions i would like to ask these people if i had the opportunity to do so.
first question: if i want to ask them to call up -- because they do hear them through the ear.
this is what they go through.
now, it may bring a certain amount of comfort, but that comfort lasts only about 20 minutes or so.
and then the people look in the mirror, and they say, i just paid a lot of money for that reading.
and what did she say to me?
we all know who he is on television.
they need to be stopped because this is a cruel farce.
we get people coming to the foundation all the time.
i have to explain that to you.
i forgot to tell you that.
i just ingested six and a half days worth of sleeping pills.
he forgot to take his pill.
i think that something needs to be done about this.
and we must do something about those problems.
we really must do something about this.
go in there and look at the archives, and you will begin to understand much more of what i've been talking about today.
there's nothing like sitting in that library and having a family appear there and say that mum gave away all the family fortune.
here we have a scene that you would find in any operating room across the u.s.
so it seems crazy, but the model that we have right now is taking those machines that were designed for that first environment that i showed you and donating or selling them to hospitals in this environment.
and everything began well until the power went out.
there has to be something better."
he took one part from here and another from there, and he tried to come up with a machine that would work in the reality that he was facing.
now let me show you a little bit about how this machine works.
and the mixture that the patient inhales needs to be at least a certain percentage oxygen or else it can become dangerous.
now that used to be a dangerous guessing game, because you only knew if you had given too little oxygen once something bad happened.
it has to stand up to the heat and the wear and tear that happens in hospitals in these rural districts.
but we still want to be sure that this is the most effective and safe device that we can be putting into hospitals.
i take it quite seriously, but i'm here to talk about something that's become very important to me in the last year or two.
i'm going to start with this picture of a beautiful cow.
and why do i say it?
what do they have in common?
the first at least is populist, and the second is elitist.
how we got to this place is the history of food in the united states.
and the death of family farms is part of this puzzle, as is almost everything from the demise of the real community to the challenge of finding a good tomato, even in summer.
but this may have cut down on housework, but it cut down on the variety of food we ate as well.
but by then cattle were already raised unnaturally.
and this took care of the situation resoundingly.
my mom is not here, so i can say this now.
now here is where we all meet.
even though we've come to this from different points, we all have to act on our knowledge to change the way that everyone thinks about food.
and this amount is predicted to double in the next 40 years or so.
and if the numbers coming in from china are anything like what they look like now, it's not going to be 40 years.
there is no good reason for eating as much meat as we do.
and i say this as a man who has eaten a fair share of corned beef in his life.
what do you think we eat per day?
some of us might think that would be a good thing.
and that happens to be quite easy.
we can continue to enjoy our food, and we continue to eat well, and we can eat even better.
we have to choose that path.
we as a society are eating twice as much meat as we did in the 50s.
so what was once the special little side treat now is the main, much more regular.
so really, any of these angles should have been enough to convince me to go vegetarian.
and i thought about it, and i came up with one.
after all, if all of us ate half as much meat, it would be like half of us were vegetarians.
i want to talk today about -- i've been asked to take the long view, and i'm going to tell you what i think are the three biggest problems for humanity from this long point of view.
it seems that there's not just one person who thinks that these problems are important.
i think death might be both too familiar and too big for most people to see it as a problem.
a person's lifetime of learning and experience is a lot more than you could put into a single book.
we are upset about the burning of the library of alexandria.
now, why do i say that this is a big problem?
you would think that it would be of some interest to try to find out more about this given that the stakes are so big, but it's a very neglected area.
i wrote a long paper on this.
and even if you just look at the current people, and ignore the potential that would be lost if we went extinct, it should still have a high priority.
think about some time in your life -- some people might never have experienced it -- but some people, there are just those moments that you have experienced where life was fantastic.
it might have been at the moment of some great, creative inspiration you might have had when you just entered this flow stage.
or when you understood something you had never done before.
every once in a while we have these moments, and we realize just how good life can be when it's at its best.
or how bad it can be at its worst.
the third big problem is that life isn't usually as wonderful as it could be.
we got rid of all of these things.
but is this really the best we can dream of?
is this the best we can do?
or is it possible to find something a little bit more inspiring to work towards?
and this is the answer -- we would have to change.
not just the way we think about the world, but the way we are -- our very biology.
human nature would have to change.
so let's look at some of the dimensions of human nature that seem to leave room for improvement.
it's just better to be able to understand more of the world around you and the people that you are communicating with, and to remember what you have learned.
some people have a better musical ability and ability to appreciate music than others have.
and they would just stare at us with bafflement when we spend time listening to a beautiful performance, like the one we just heard -- because of people making stupid movements, and they would be really irritated and wouldn't see what we were up to.
but we are just literally deaf to that kind of value.
and i want to start with a question that has just been consuming me since i first became familiar with your work.
are they ever in equilibrium in the way that you see your work?
and so i went about and made that sculpture, turning it out of solid bronze.
and so for me, it was really exciting just to see what it looks like if you could step outside and into a larger context, as though you were an astronaut, and see these two things as an object, because they are so intimately bound, and one is meaningless without the other.
and i'm wondering how much of a sense of discovery there is in playing with these forces.
so i got it down to just one tether to be able to support that.
so the one on the right was done first, and then the one on the left was done over it.
and then i left gaps so you could see the one that was done before.
there are lines in front of the one on the right, and there are lines behind the one on the left, and so it takes it into different planes.
there are shapes that come about just by the marriage of two events that are happening, and i'm very interested in that.
there are lots of things that appear.
you don't think of yourself as the master of these forces.
you think of yourself as the servant.
it just has so much in it.
and i think nature wants to express itself in the sense that we are nature, humans are of the universe.
and i think it was a great place to grow up as an artist because i grew up around quirky, colorful characters who were great at making with their hands.
and what was amazing to me -- well it was pretty kickass; he was killing a fly in the house with a gun -- but what was so amazing to me was that he knew just enough how to pump it.
and he could shoot it from two rooms away and not damage what it was on because he knew how to pump it just enough to kill the fly and not damage what it landed on.
so i should talk about art.
so i started thinking and listing what all it was that i thought would make a perfect biennial.
it needs to worked on until it can speak fluently.
and it would have "hand" in that it would be greatly crafted.
so i started thinking about how am i going to do this biennial, how am i going to travel the world and find these artists?
and so this is what i did.
so what i did was i invented a hundred artists from around the world.
i felt, oh this is the kind of project that i could spend my whole life doing.
so i should start to talk about these guys.
and this is 22 feet long.
and what i loved about her work is, when i would walk around it and look down into the sky, looking down to watch the sky, and it unfolded in a new way.
and i love to dig a hole.
so this piece was great fun because it was two days of digging in soft dirt.
and that was played by my mom.
i love this piece because i have a little cousin at home who introduced me -- which i think is such a great introduction -- to a friend one day as, "this is my cousin shea.
and what he does is -- he spends a week at a time with a family.
and he spends that week talking to the family about what do they think great art is.
and he makes a work that answers what they think great art is.
what he did was to get wild birds to make his art for him.
so he put the material in places where the birds were going to collect them, and they crafted his nests for him.
and she was thinking about her friends and family who work in chaos-ridden places and developing countries, and she was thinking, what can i make that would be of value to them, in case something bad happens and they have to buy their way across the border or pay off a gunman?
and you would carry this around with you, and if everything went to hell, you could make payments and buy your life.
and she makes them so they could either be broken up into payments, or they could be like these, which are leaves that can be payments.
and this one had to get broken up.
he had to break off a piece to get out of egypt recently.
so what they do is they move into an area and try to establish a new tradition in a small geographic area.
and we got a lot of attention when we did it.
and you in essence have a funeral that you get to be present for.
he is interested in how we see as an animal, how we are interested in mimicry and camouflage.
we just have that natural way of seeing.
and he pairs these up with paintings.
like this is a painting of a snake in a box.
and what they've done is they put a warning sign on every single barb on this fence.
he even once traded a work of art for a block of government cheese because the person wanted it so badly.
and you would think that should have nothing to do with one another, but i hope by the end of these 18 minutes, you'll see a little bit of a relation.
this is a plate from 1797.
it shows these women playing with these toys.
and that might have been the case.
and where it has led in origami is to things like this.
and what changed is something you might not have expected in an art, which is math.
and that leads to a very powerful tool.
because what you can do is take your problem, and turn it into a problem that someone else has solved, and use their solutions.
and i want to tell you how we did that in origami.
but if we follow the laws of origami, we can put these patterns into another fold that itself might be something very, very simple, but when we put it together, we get something a little different.
or you can ramp up and go up to 50 stars on a flag, with 13 stripes.
what matters is what we mean by those symbols.
so how do we do that?
and from that stick figure, i somehow have to get to a folded shape that has a part for every bit of the subject, a flap for every leg.
and i'm going to show you all how to do that so you can go out of here and fold something.
how would you make a single flap?
what paper went into that flap?
i can use it for something else.
what if i want to make something that has a lot of flaps?
i need a lot of circles.
and here's where the dead people start to help us out, because lots of people have studied the problem of packing circles.
or you could do a moose.
and you can do more than just insects.
and what this has allowed is the creation of origami-on-demand.
but i want to show you some examples.
and we can use this not just for visuals, but it turns out to be useful even in the real world.
and i want to show you some of these examples.
but if you want to go higher and go larger than this, then you might need some origami.
whether you look up or look down, how do you get it up in space?
so you have to make it smaller.
how do you make a large sheet of glass smaller?
well, about the only way is to fold it up somehow.
so you have to do something like this.
but this pattern's not going to work to get something 100 meters down to a few meters.
and this example is the latter.
it holds open a blocked artery when it gets to its destination, but it needs to be much smaller for the trip there, through your blood vessels.
not a lot of women did.
certainly this is not the first time that we've had great progress with women.
this is really just about the facts of this economic moment that we live in.
now all you men out there, this is not the moment where you tune out or throw some tomatoes, because the point is that this is happening to all of us.
but if we do take account of it, then i think it will go much more smoothly.
i first started thinking about this about a year and a half ago.
and i realized that two things were different this time around.
and second, that the story was no longer just about the crisis of men, but it was also about what was happening to women.
and now look at this second set of slides.
these are things we never could have imagined a few years ago.
and they expected that it would be young families, or young men, just like it had always been.
so here you have a generation of young women who grow up thinking of themselves as being more powerful earners than the young men around them.
this has been going on for 40 years now.
you'll watch them both drop out of the middle class, but see what happens to women and see what happens to men.
watch what happens to the women.
watch what happens to the men.
what the economy requires now is a whole different set of skills.
you would tell everyone below you what to do.
and those are all things that women do very well.
women enter the workplace at the top, and then at the working class, all the new jobs that are created are the kinds of jobs that wives used to do for free at home.
so those are all the jobs that are growing, and those are jobs that women tend to do.
and here the story is fairly simple.
so for some reason men just don't end up going back to college.
i mean they have much larger vocabulary.
they were just not listening to the class while the girls sat there very nicely.
but these college girls had a completely different view of their future.
basically, the way they said it to me is that they would be working 18 hours a day, that their husband would maybe have a job, but that mostly he would be at home taking care of the kiddies.
and i think the reason it has a sting is because thousands of years of history don't reverse themselves without a lot of pain, and that's why i talk about us all going through this together.
they were men who had been contractors, or they had been building houses and they had lost their jobs after the housing boom, and they were in this group because they were failing to pay their child support.
and the instructor was up there in the class explaining to them all the ways in which they had lost their identity in this new age.
and that's part of the reason i like to talk about this, because i think it can be pretty painful, and we really have to work through it.
and sometimes family would pray to the spirits to kill off a girl child so they could have a male child.
and now look at the chart.
so you can see that these economic changes really do have a strong effect on our culture.
and they come up in lots of different forms.
and so it feels like we have to move from this place where we've got these uber-exaggerated images into something that feels a little more normal.
and we have a lot of skill and experience, but it's a trick, so how are you supposed to prepare to get through that glass ceiling?
what crazy person would pop their head through a glass ceiling?
so the image that i like to think of, instead of glass ceiling, is the high bridge.
and the great thing is there's no trick like with the glass ceiling.
there's no man or woman standing in the middle about to cut the cables.
and the great thing is that you can take anyone along with you.
you can bring your husband along.
but the point about the high bridge is that you have to have the confidence to know that you deserve to be on that bridge, that you have all the skills and experience you need in order to walk across the high bridge, but you just have to make the decision to take the first step and do it.
and i would like to share with you some of the bits of the conversation that we started with.
we had a lot that got us excited.
he came up with our name and logo.
i grew up in europe, and world war ii caught me when i was between seven and 10 years old.
so i became interested in understanding what contributed to a life that was worth living.
and i tried, as a child, as a teenager, to read philosophy and to get involved in art and religion and many other ways that i could see as a possible answer to that question.
but i found that on the -- i read in the newspapers that there was to be a presentation by someone in a place that i'd seen in the center of zurich, and it was about flying saucers [that] he was going to talk.
and the man who talked at that evening lecture was very interesting.
and i started reading his books after that lecture.
then i came to this country to study psychology and i started trying to understand the roots of happiness.
but this little excerpt is a very good summary of what he was saying during the interview.
and then it became essentially an analogy for a mental state where you feel that you are not doing your ordinary everyday routines.
we know the temples they built, where people could come to experience a different reality.
these are the remains of civilizations and they are the places that people went to experience life in a more concentrated, more ordered form.
he needs just a piece of paper where he can put down little marks, and as he does that, he can imagine sounds that had not existed before in that particular combination.
now he says also that this is so intense an experience that it feels almost as if he didn't exist.
and he says that his hand seems to be moving by itself.
whether it's mathematics or music, it takes that long to be able to begin to change something in a way that it's better than what was there before.
and it happens in different realms.
this is by a student of mine who interviewed some of the leading writers and poets in the united states.
but it happens in other activities.
you see that these people define success as something that helps others and at the same time makes you feel happy as you are working at it.
you know that what you need to do is possible to do, even though difficult, and sense of time disappears, you forget yourself, you feel part of something larger.
and once the conditions are present, what you are doing becomes worth doing for its own sake.
and two things that we measure is the amount of challenge people experience at that moment and the amount of skill that they feel they have at that moment.
so for each person we can establish an average, which is the center of the diagram.
but you have a kind of a set point there, which would be in the middle.
and you may be doing things very differently from other people, but for everyone that flow channel, that area there, will be when you are doing what you really like to do -- play the piano, be with your best friend, perhaps work, if work is what provides flow for you.
and then the other areas become less and less positive.
your skills are not quite as high as they should be, but you can move into flow fairly easily by just developing a little more skill.
control is also a good place to be, because there you feel comfortable, but not very excited.
so those two are ideal and complementary areas from which flow is easy to go into.
so the question we are trying to address -- and i'm way over time -- is how to put more and more of everyday life in that flow channel.
i still remember the day in school when our teacher told us that the world population had become three billion people, and that was in 1960.
they were saving to be able to buy a pair of shoes.
and now their aspiration is not only to have a car.
so this is where they are today.
and the tragedy is that the two billion over here that is struggling for food and shoes, they are still almost as poor as they were 50 years ago.
but this is the world we have today, no longer any gap.
this is the new world we have today in 2010.
and what will happen in the future?
this is what we will find there.
and they still have a child survival of only 70 to 80 percent, meaning that if you have six children born, there will be at least four who survive to the next generation.
so the only way of really getting world population [growth] to stop is to continue to improve child survival to 90 percent.
we can stop at nine billion if we do the right things.
child survival is the new green.
we can have a much more just world.
the role of the old west in the new world is to become the foundation of the modern world -- nothing more, nothing less.
do it well and get used to it.
and vitamin d has had a great deal of press, and a lot of people get concerned about it.
and that really prevented the rickets that used to be common in this city.
so i went off to the states, as many people do if they're going to do research, and i spent a few years in pittsburgh.
and i then moved back to edinburgh.
so these are kind of sunlamps.
one of the subjects here was my mother-in-law, and clearly i do not know her age.
but certainly in people older than my wife, this appears to be a more marked effect.
and the other thing i should mention was there was no change in vitamin d.
now, one of the problems with looking at blood pressure is your body does everything it can to keep your blood pressure at the same place.
in the arm, you can measure blood flow in the arm by how much it swells up as some blood flows into it.
so you can look at the wavelengths of light that do that.
i actually think a far more important message is that there are benefits as well as risks to sunlight.
and i think that we need to be more aware of, and we need to find the risk-benefit ratio.
and i told her -- is that i think we miss an opportunity to find these kids who have the entrepreneurial traits, and to groom them or show them that being an entrepreneur is actually a cool thing.
it's not something that is a bad thing and is vilified, which is what happens in a lot of society.
we get told that we need to study harder or be more focused or get a tutor.
and it was a speaking event in front of groups of entrepreneurs from around the world.
entrepreneurs are people -- because we have a lot of them in this room -- who have these ideas and these passions or see these needs in the world and we decide to stand up and do it.
and we put everything on the line to make that stuff happen.
we have the ability to get those groups of people around us that want to kind of build that dream with us, and i think if we could get kids to embrace the idea at a young age of being entrepreneurial, we could change everything in the world that is a problem today.
if you teach a man to fish, you feed him for a lifetime."
right now we teach our kids to go after really good jobs, you know, and the school system teaches them to go after things like being a doctor and being a lawyer and being an accountant and a dentist and a teacher and a pilot.
they teach them to go work in corporations.
i look at even my family.
and we all decided to start these things because it's really the only place we fit.
i could go on and on.
fit into this other system and try to become a student."
i open up chapter eight talking about budgeting.
and i told the author, after they did my interview, that i cheated in that same course.
and she thought it was too funny to not include it anyway.
it just means that those few things have to feel right in your gut.
is it thing one or thing two?
i think it can be both.
when i was growing up as a young kid, i had no choice, because i was taught at a very early, young age -- when my dad realized i wasn't going to fit into everything else that was being taught to me in school -- that he could teach me to figure out business at an early age.
and i was calling all the dry cleaners in winnipeg to find out how much would the dry cleaners pay me for coat hangers.
and my mom came into the room and she said, "where are you going to get the coat hangers to sell to the dry cleaners?"
and we went down to the basement.
and i opened up this cupboard.
because, when i told her i was going out to play with the kids, i was going door to door in the neighborhood to collect coat hangers to put in the basement to sell.
because i saw her a few weeks before that -- you could get paid.
and i knew she wouldn't want me to go get them, so i just did it anyway.
this one person offered me three cents and i got him up to three and a half.
i got three and a half cents for a thousand coat hangers.
my dad actually made me go find someone who would sell me these things at wholesale.
but i was convinced i was going to get him to buy a license plate protector.
i learned that at a young age.
and i would go biking up to the end of the beach and buy all the comics from the poor kids.
and then i would go back to the other end of the beach and sell them to the rich kids.
and i learned that at a young age.
i was forced to get a paper route at 10 years old.
so not only would he get me one, but i had to get two, and then he wanted me to hire someone to deliver half the papers, which i did, and then i realized that collecting tips was where you made all the money.
so i would go and collect for all the papers.
because then i realized i could make the money.
by this point, i was definitely not going to be an employee.
they had this old brass and copper.
i asked him what he did with it, and he said he just throws it out.
remember at 10 years old -- so 34 years ago i saw opportunity in this stuff.
i saw there was money in garbage.
and i was actually collecting it from all the automotive shops in the area on my bicycle.
and i thought that was kind of cool.
and making money off that too.
but what i realized was that you had to have options.
so i learned that lesson at a young age.
i was not allowed to have jobs.
and people could never get their bags up it.
you just figure out a way to make more money faster.
and i had this captured market.
you just needed to have a supply and demand and this audience who bought into you.
but everybody else was looking in the bush and looking in the ditches for golf balls.
so i would go into the ponds and crawl around and pick them up with my toes.
you just pick them up with both feet.
and then i had all the good ones that didn't look crappy.
this is what really kind of gets everybody hating you is because you're trying to extract money from all your friends all the time.
so i sold lots and lots of sunglasses.
and i think i was 14.
and i remember that lesson to this day.
come to me and tell me what it is.
and then you know what we do?
they go around looking for what it is.
every year all the money in the bank goes to their broker.
you can teach those habits to young kids when they don't even feel the pain yet.
maybe four nights out of the week read them bedtime stories and three nights of the week have them tell stories.
it teaches them to sell; it teaches them creativity; it teaches them to think on their feet.
just do that kind of stuff and have fun with it.
get kids to stand up in front of groups and talk, even if it's just stand up in front of their friends and do plays and have speeches.
and they can actually sell it and learn how to find scammers when they get email offers come in.
teach them how to do that kind of stuff and make money.
look for that kind of stuff.
there's two traits that i want you to also look out for that we don't kind of get out of their system.
but how about getting entrepreneurship to be ranked right up there with the rest of them as well?
thank you very much for having me.
and it shows the first time an organ was ever transplanted.
medicine is doing a better job of keeping us alive.
this is actually a picture of a salamander.
you see here a little video.
at the time of injury or disease, the body's first reaction is to seal itself off from the rest of the body.
one of the ways that we do that is actually by using smart biomaterials.
and you see that it is injured.
we basically found out that you can use these smart biomaterials that you can actually use as a bridge.
turns out your body can regenerate, but only for small distances.
what do we do when we have injuries for structures which are much larger than one centimeter?
then we can start to use cells.
we want to make sure that we condition this muscle, so that it knows what to do once we put it into the patient.
this is actually the artery that goes from your neck to your brain.
it takes about four weeks to grow these cells from the organ.
from the time you take that piece of tissue, six to eight weeks later you can put the organ right back into the patient.
and then a few weeks later we can take out the cartilage scaffold.
this is actually one of the strategies.
you see the heart coming out there.
we can use it from one patient to the next.
now you can see it start.
and for those we still need stem cells.
and we prefer cells that will not reject and will not form tumors.
but it takes a lot to get there.
and those are usually the basic scientists, the bottom is usually the surgeons.
are you ready to place this in your own loved one, your own child, your own family member, and then we proceed.
she did not have a normal bladder.
we are just taking five seconds.
and now i can just go and go out with my friends, go do whatever i want.
so i thought i'd start by telling you how i got here.
the story begins in the late '90s.
what kind of a world should we be making?
what kind of a world can we be making?"
are treated with more and more skepticism, and move off the table.
and that was only the beginning.
we may be at the top of the list when it comes to influencing access to personal wealth.
we are not even on the list when it comes to our responsibility for the health of this democracy.
the value of the past also comes alive; it provides a lot of company.
so we are doing our job.
while these past weeks have been a time of national exhilaration in this country, it would be tragic if you thought this meant your job was done.
people will continue and should continue to learn everything there is to know about something or other.
we actually do it all the time.
that is where you come in.
if the question of where to start seems overwhelming you are at the beginning, not the end of this adventure.
being overwhelmed is the first step if you are serious about trying to get at things that really matter, on a scale that makes a difference.
so what do you do when you feel overwhelmed?
i want to talk about what we learn from conservatives.
they go to church, by which i mean, they do lots of things for free for each other.
they serve food to poor people.
they are in many important places against markets.
because they understand: there are places for the market and places where the market should not exist, where we should be free to enjoy the fellowship of others.
larry lessig: so what he does is he begins to tell us about these three videos.
they decided they wanted to do the same.
i think it's important that we keep these two different kinds of public goods in mind.
freedom needs this opportunity to both have the commercial success of the great commercial works and the opportunity to build this different kind of culture.
in the good old days when this republican ran that company, their greatest work was work that built on the past, right.
you could still buy the music, but you couldn't hear anything because it had been silenced.
so i did what the current regime says i must do to be free to use youtube to talk about fair use.
i went to this site, and i had to answer these questions.
we need to speak of those values.
and i believe the answer is yes.
this means that people in my group were doing a lot of vacuuming during this project.
so the very first thing we wanted to do in this building was look at the air system.
and that is exactly what we found.
he went from thinking just about energy to also starting to think about human health.
so what i'm first going to show you is air that we sampled outside of the building.
we blocked them off at night so that they got no ventilation.
and he was reading it in their library in the far east.
and this began to get a head of steam.
these are some examples of this system in action in the late 80s.
and he told me about his proposed system called the world wide web.
but he was completely convinced that his world wide web would take over the world one day.
i'm going to try and save you all the time and all the money and go through it in the next three minutes, so bear with me.
because in the last four years we've seen all kinds of memes, all kinds of trends get born right on our front page.
they wanted to put an end to it.
and one of the ways they wanted to do it was to put a tracking chip inside one of these humpback whales.
and this was the final vote.
they even created an e-card so you could send your friend a dancing splashy.
but what was even more important was the fact that they actually accomplished their mission.
a few of them certainly were.
but we're talking about a lot of people who were just really interested and really caught up in this great meme, and in fact someone from greenpeace came back on the site and thanked reddit for its participation.
this was just out of interest in doing something cool.
this is that great big secret.
your link is just as good as your link, which is just as good as my link.
there are so many great publishing tools that are available, it only takes a few minutes of your time now to actually produce something.
and the cost of iteration is so cheap that you might as well give it a go.
and that's the final message that i want to share with all of you -- that you can do well online.
but no longer is the message going to be coming from just the top down.
now the big question here is obviously, how do we make sense of china?
now i want to offer you three building blocks for trying to understand what china is like, just as a beginning.
these are all things that come from the period of the civilization-state.
they really believe in their own superiority, and they are disrespectful of those who are not.
this is as close as china gets to a kind of spiritual role.
so you can see that the way in which power has been constructed in china is very different from our experience in western history.
and i would suggest to you that actually what we are dealing with here, in the chinese context, is a new kind of paradigm, which is different from anything we've had to think about in the past.
the state is everywhere in china.
so there we have three building blocks for trying to understand the difference that is china -- the civilization-state, the notion of race and the nature of the state and its relationship to society.
and that is what is going to happen in the future.
china already has a bigger network than any other country in the world and will soon have more than all the rest of the world put together.
and it does speeds of up to about 100 miles an hour.
i think there will be good things about it and there will be bad things about it.
to make the future rather than wait for it.
i had a plan, and i never ever thought it would have anything to do with the banjo.
little did i know what a huge impact it would have on me one night when i was at a party and i heard a sound coming out of a record player in the corner of a room.
i knew i had to take a banjo with me to china.
and i was sitting in a hallway one night and a couple girls came up to me.
so i picked up my banjo and i nervously played four songs that i actually knew with them.
and after a few months i was writing songs.
and the first song i wrote was in english, and the second one was in chinese.
inside your heart a voice is calling.
and i see the power of music.
and then they come up to me after the show and they all have a story.
and this little girl comes up to me.
"big sister wong, can i sing you a song that my mom sang for me before she was swallowed in the earthquake?"
and the light that shone off of her eyes was a place i could have stayed forever.
i want to dwell in that light with you and with everyone.
learn more about his work and learn how you can join in at insideoutproject.net.
you have to make a wish to save the world."
i started when i was 15 years old.
and at that time, i was not thinking about changing the world.
i would never have to make a book and then present it to a gallery and let them decide if my work was nice enough to show it to people.
i would control it directly with the public in the streets.
i would change -- depending on the places i would go -- the title of the exhibition.
i was quite proud of that one.
because i was just 18 and i was just up there on the top of the champs-elysees.
a large wave of riots had broken into the first projects of paris.
it was the only one i had at that time.
but with that lens, you have to be as close as 10 inches from the person.
so you can do it only with their trust.
a year later, i was listening to all the noise about the middle east conflict.
so with my friend marco, we decided to go there and see who are the real palestinians and who are the real israelis.
when we got there, we just went in the street, started talking with people everywhere, and we realized that things were a bit different from the rhetoric we heard in the media.
asked them to make a face as a sign of commitment.
so we arrived with just our ladders and we realized that they were not high enough.
so he went to the church of nativity and brought back an old ladder that was so old that it could have seen jesus being born.
we had all sorts of help from all walks of life.
and those ones are actually two taxi-drivers."
and then there was always a silence.
the rain and the wind will take them off anyway.
they are not meant to stay.
so this direction in the street were kind of interesting.
so i decided to go further in this direction and go in places where there were zero museums.
when you go in these developing societies, women are the pillars of their community, but the men are still the ones holding the streets.
most of the places i went to, i decided to go there because i've heard about it through the media.
and the army took them, and instead of bringing them to the police station, they brought them to an enemy favela where they get chopped into pieces.
so i decided to go there.
so we just walked around, and we met a woman, and i showed her my book.
so i went out and i started with the kids.
the day after, i came back and they were already scratched.
i wanted them to feel that this art belongs to them.
then the next day, i held a meeting on the main square and some women came.
you see that enough in the media.
and actually i've been seeing it around me the last few days."
so how can we know about the project?
so they had to go and find the women and get an explanation from them.
so i asked the people what happened.
i heard culturally and because of the law, they would just arrest us at the first pasting.
but you know how india has a lot of dust in the streets, and the more dust you would have going up in the air, on the white paper you can almost see, but there is this sticky part like when you reverse a sticker.
so we could just walk in the street during the next days and the photos would get revealed by themselves.
behind each image is a story.
we did that in most of the places.
so we decided to come the year after and keep doing the project.
so i have no responsibility to anyone but myself and the subjects.
and that is for me one of the more important things in the work.
and that has always been a certain part of the work.
because this can be taken for advertising, and because of the law, it has to be taken down."
but they asked me for a promise basically.
when i do my work, i have two kinds of reactions.
i wanted that wish to actually start now.
what we see changes who we are.
when we act together, the whole thing is much more than the sum of the parts.
and this starts right now and depends on you.
and we come from a long tradition of sharing.
it's a physical infrastructure that allows us to get from point a to point b and move things that way.
and so they were very clever about the way that they packaged car-sharing.
they made sure that the demographic for who they were targeting and the car was all matching.
but they understood fundamentally that they are not a car company.
and so what percent of the day do you think the average person uses a car?
so people have created this business.
people are making anywhere between 200 and 700 dollars a month letting their neighbors use their car when they're not using it.
it allows us as owners to have other options.
and so there's about seven or eight cities already in the u.s.
so i was having a coffee in portland, and half-of-a-latte in and the little board in the cafe all of a sudden starts showing me that the next bus is coming in three minutes and the train is coming in 16 minutes.
but these sorts of things are happening in many different environments.
and the opportunity to really focus trust and attention is a wonderful thing.
so a lot of what we see in the mesh, and a lot of what we have in the platform that we built allows us to define, refine and scale.
i would just like to say that one of the big things, when we look at waste and when we look at ways that we can really be generous and contribute to each other, but also move to create a better economic situation and a better environmental situation, is by sharing failures.
they made a lot of mistakes.
they had some number of big successes.
and it grows on a very regular daily basis.
so i just want to welcome all of you onto the ride.
i had no clue what she was talking about, but it was convincing enough for me never to draw again until the ninth grade.
he had a good laugh at the other teachers and put it up on the notice board.
this is a part of that.
and i became a school hero.
i have to tell you a little bit about my family.
and mad and crazy and fun.
when i started teaching them, i said let me start doing this professionally.
when i was 18 i started my own school.
however, an 18 year-old trying to start a school is not easy unless you have a big patron or a big supporter.
i went to the place where his helicopter was about to land.
i got stuck at the third.
this is one i remember fondly.
anyway, what i did was i decided that i need to take a break.
he invited me to his studio.
i thought there was something really beautiful about that.
forget it, they will confuse you even if you know how to draw.
they had to be larger than life.
and for me it was, i had to dance while i painted.
i called my friends, painted on their bodies, and had them dance in front of a painting.
and i saw my work come alive.
and i wondered how they did it from so close.
this is a painting i did of my wife in my apartment.
i must have been 19 and a half then, and it was love at first sight.
i have to travel seven oceans, and i have to come and see you.
so what we did was we rented a little van and we drove all over the east coast trying to sell it.
she contacted anyone and everyone who was willing to buy my work.
she made enough money, she sold off the whole collection and made enough money to move me for four years with lawyers, a company, everything, and she became my manager.
i thought of myself as a bit of a rockstar.
and i said that the best way to celebrate is to marry netra.
but all this excitement led to the press writing about us.
i love my mother and i was told all of a sudden that she was going to die.
and they said you have to say bye to her, you have to do what you have to do.
i could not live this larger than life person.
the bollywood stars who i would party with and buy my work disappeared.
but i wanted people to actually feel my work from their gut, because i was painting it from my gut.
and i talked about the weakness of male sexuality.
so, i decided it was time to end and go back home.
and i thought the best way, as most of you know who have children, the best way to have a new lease on life, is to have a child.
i decided to have a child, and before i did that, i quickly studied what can go wrong.
how can a family get dysfunctional?
and two magical things happened after he was born.
you know i sat at home and i watched.
and this was just eight months ago.
everything about my work has become more whimsical.
i was talking to mother and father this morning, and my dad said, "i know you have so much you want to say, but you have to talk about your work with children."
i whipped out my pen, and i started drawing on her head and i drew a crown for her.
i hope you will join me in this magic carpet ride, and touch children and be honest.
and this change is getting more rapid.
the future will be more unpredictable.
it did this a thousand years ago.
that's what the experience of the last 20 years has been.
the other major development is going to be in the area of what can happen in genetics.
but will this only be available for the super rich, for those that can afford it?
will only those that are able to afford it be able to be this super race of the future?
this could be our best century ever because of the achievements, or it could be our worst.
that will be the challenge of the scholars, and of all of us engaged in thinking about the future.
the rest of our lives will be in the future.
we need to prepare for it now.
it is vital that the ideas that are nurtured in ted, that the ideas that we think about look forward, and make sure that this will be the most glorious century, and not one of eco-disaster and eco-collapse.
what i want to talk about today is one idea.
it's an idea for a new kind of school, which turns on its head much of our conventional thinking about what schools are for and how they work.
and it might just be coming to a neighborhood near you soon.
and we felt the most important priority was to bring together two sets of problems.
and so we try to ask: what kind of school would have the teenagers fighting to get in, not fighting to stay out?
and the design we came up with had the following characteristics.
and what we found -- and we got quite a lot of things wrong and then improved them -- but we found that the young people loved it.
now not surprisingly, that influenced some people to think we were onto something.
and the business organizations thought we were onto something in terms of a way of preparing children much better for real-life work today.
and it spread because of the power of an idea -- so the very, very simple idea about turning education on its head and putting the things which were marginal, things like working in teams, doing practical projects, and putting them right at the heart of learning, rather than on the edges.
they're not like all of you who can sit in rows and hear things said to you for hour after hour.
they want to do things, they want to get their hands dirty, they want education to be for real.
and my hope is that some of you out there may be able to help us.
and i hope that a few of you at least can help us make that happen.
you can tell by the power squat, i was a very confident boy -- and not without reason.
when i was seven i went to summer camp.
my parents found it necessary for peace of mind.
you could jump off the end into the deep end.
so water was something that scared me to begin with.
but i would go in on occasion.
and i thought this would be great fun.
and i tried to come up for air, and my lower back hit the bottom of the inner tube.
and i went wild eyed and thought i was going to die.
that is something that i did not get over.
that is when i realized that i was not the incredible hulk.
but there is a happy ending to this story.
and i would like to share my art.
i find that the best results in life are often held back by false constructs and untested assumptions.
so here are the new rules of swimming, if any of you are afraid of swimming, or not good at it.
so what you want to focus on instead is allowing your lower body to draft behind your upper body, much like a small car behind a big car on the highway.
the only way you can do that is to not swim on top of the water.
and you can see that he's extending his right arm below his head and far in front.
here is an example of the stroke.
but you do use a small flick.
you can see this is the left extension.
then you see his left leg.
and that will get you very far.
most of my friends were taking japanese.
so i thought why not punish myself?
six months later i had the chance to go to japan.
it will be an amazing experience."
so my parents encouraged me to do it.
i couldn't believe i was on the other side of the world.
and a teacher came up to me and handed me a piece of paper.
and so it came to me in waves.
there had been something lost in translation.
nothing worked until i found this.
you can also do this with grammar.
we can talk about that if anyone in interested.
and so i ended up walking like this.
i found that longer steps were much more elegant.
so you can have -- and you can do it in a very small space in fact.
these seemed to be the three areas that i could exploit to compete if i wanted to comptete against people who'd been practicing for 20 to 30 years.
i want you to see part of what i practiced.
now what i like about this video is it's actually a video of the first time they ever danced together because of his lead.
so he can lift the woman to break her, for example.
so then we broke it down.
this would be an example of one pivot.
this is a back step pivot.
more often than not it shows you exactly what you should do.
and if any of you are interested in that, i would love to speak with you.
but i ask a lot of questions, and i would love your advice.
watch for the moment when einstein has a moment with al gore.
it would be very dangerous if you fell down.
i know, you need to get rid of that seed first.
well, we would like to encourage all of you to do your part to help protect einstein's animal friends, and to do your part to help protect their homes that they live [in].
why do we want to protect your home?
what would you like to say to all these nice people?
can you blow them a kiss?
and what i'm going to do today is tell you a little bit more about how it really works on the inside.
and so if you think about what that means, it means a lot more than just building a cool website.
and so we're going to have to do a lot of work that goes beyond just the internet.
i can go online any time of the day or night and see eight to 10 people waiting for me to ask a question or something, anything about the servers.
you could never afford to do this in a company.
you could never afford to have a standby crew of people 24 hours a day and do what we're doing at wikipedia.
we could actually do without the employee.
they hired experts to come and look at articles and compare the quality, and we were very pleased with that result.
and it is true that we did have to lock the articles on a couple of occasions.
this came after i told the reporter that we had to lock it for -- occasionally a little bit here and there.
and the reason for this is that most people understand the need for neutrality.
so how do we do this?
every single change on the site goes to the recent changes page.
so as soon as he made his change, it went to the recent changes page.
and then users can set up their own personal watch list.
all these people know each other.
but you can imagine there's a lot of other areas where the question is, is this notable enough to go in an encyclopedia?
this is not really a vote so much as it is a dialogue.
and it also matters who the people are who are voting.
and i also like to say she's the only person who actually knows all the rules of wikipedia, so ...
i mean, this could happen and what if some group gets really seriously organized and comes in and wants to vote?"
and that turns out to not be true.
but part of that is to fulfill our mission of giving an encyclopedia to every single person on the planet.
why do we crave love so much, even to the point that we would die for it?
he stood over six feet tall.
so, before i start telling you about the brain, i want to read for you what i think is the most powerful love poem on earth.
"fire runs through my body with the pain of loving you.
pain runs through my body with the fires of my love for you.
i remember what you said to me.
i am thinking of your love for me.
i am torn by your love for me.
pain and more pain -- where are you going with my love?
i am told you will go from here.
i am told you will leave me here.
how many people have suffered in all the millions of years of human evolution?
how many people around the world are dancing with elation at this very minute?
you lose your sense of self.
it was very difficult actually, putting these people in the machine, because they were in such bad shape.
two thousand years later, we can explain this in the brain.
no wonder people suffer around the world, and we have so many crimes of passion.
so, what have i learned from this experiment that i would like to tell the world?
and she was driving along in her car the other day, and suddenly she heard a song on the car radio that reminded her of this man.
i would also like to tell the world that animals love.
and i think that this is really the origin of what you and i call "love at first sight."
people have often asked me whether what i know about love has spoiled it for me.
you can know every single ingredient in a piece of chocolate cake, and then when you sit down and eat that cake, you can still feel that joy.
as a matter of fact, in new york, i often catch myself looking in baby carriages and feeling a little sorry for the tot.
there are still many questions to be answered and asked about romantic love.
i know what happens in the brain, when you do become in love, but i don't know why you fall in love with one person rather than another.
and there are many reasons that you fall in love with one person rather than another, that psychologists can tell you.
this is a song that i wrote about the meaning of technology, which goes perfectly with this gathering.
now you can just go on google.
i wish i had that when i was in college.
this next song is a song that started out as a dream -- a childhood dream.
so "tembererana" was these dreams, in which i would be running away from bad feelings -- is the only way i can put it.
there is no turning back now.
but i feel like a bird sometimes.
when you go out of an airplane you are almost naked.
and especially when you take a tracking position, you have the feeling that you are flying.
you are just in the element.
and i wanted to keep this freedom of movement.
i want to go down like that.
bg: describe for me the equipment since you have it here.
i know i have about eight minutes fuel.
that means, if i have a problem with the first one i pull, i still have the possibility to open the second one.
i did use that during these last 15 years about 20 times -- never with that type of wing, but at the beginning.
so the next thing i saw was just blue.
and then i did open my chute.
people have died trying to do this kind of thing.
we have a hundred years of experience.
so just as a curiosity, where did you land when you flew over the grand canyon?
so it was much safer for me to land at the bottom.
and i hope it will be for everybody.
how to make that difference is surely the most important universal truth that it is possible to know.
so they believed that knowledge came from authorities that actually knew very little.
but we know about those things.
no one has ever seen evolution.
i think there is one thing you have to care about.
there is such a thing as a defect in a story.
i'm going to tell you about one of the world's largest problems and how it can be solved.
there are just way too few eye care professionals.
how do you solve this problem?
what i want to do is to show you that one can make a pair of glasses.
i shall just show you how you make a pair of glasses.
i look at the signs at the end, i can hardly see them.
and that vision is to try to get a billion people wearing the glasses they need by the year 2020.
to do that -- this is an early example of the technology.
but the cost has to be brought right down.
how do you solve this problem?
you start to get into detail.
how do you work out how to fit the thing?
how do you have people realizing that they have a vision problem?
how do you deal with the industry?
and the answer to that is research.
what we've done is to set up the center for vision in the developing world here in the university.
if you want to know more, just come have a look at our website.
now imaginative people have been having fun with this for over 400 years.
all of my time was spent outside with the inuit, playing.
and i knew someday that i was going to do something that had to do with trying to share news about it and protect it.
i sat there on the river for two months without seeing one.
so i had two months to sit there and figure out different ways of what i was going to do in my next life, after i was a photographer, because they were going to fire me.
and after two months of sitting there -- one day, thinking that it was all over, this incredible big white male came down, right beside me, three feet away from me, and he went down and grabbed a fish and went off in the forest and ate it.
and then i spent the entire day living my childhood dream of walking around with this bear through the forest.
after a while of reading this in the news, it just becomes news.
and what i'm trying to do with my work is put faces to this.
this was a bear i sat with for a while on the shores.
and they're not like the harbor seals that you have here.
i wish i could spend half an hour telling you about how we almost died on this dive.
so really what the ice does is it acts like a garden.
it acts like the soil in a garden.
losing that ice is like losing the soil in a garden.
this is after an hour under the ice.
and i've come up, and all i wanted to do was get out of the water.
this is the foundation of the whole food chain in the arctic, right here.
even though that spirit bear moment was powerful, i don't think i'll ever have another experience like i did with these leopard seals.
and so people love to form their opinions.
this is just the food chain unfolding.
the boat starts to sink, they race back to the ship and get to go home and tell the stories of how they got attacked.
and he has a lot of experience with leopard seals.
and what it's trying to do is turn that penguin inside-out, so it can eat the meat off the bones, and then it goes off and gets another one.
but i think i probably used a different word starting with the letter f.
and my legs were just trembling.
and this was the first thing she did.
so that's all i had to work with at that point.
she does this over and over.
and she would sort of bring them over to me and offer it to me.
this went on for four days.
and then so she realized i couldn't catch live ones, so she brought me dead penguins.
she would not stop trying to feed me penguins.
she chased that big seal away, went and got its penguin and brought it to me.
that wasn't the only seal i got in the water with.
i got in the water with 30 other leopard seals, and i never once had a scary encounter.
it was usually too hot, too stuffy or just too smelly, and my father would not let us use the air conditioner.
the thick walls are great for insulation.
so what do we do here?
how do we pull ourselves and dig us out of this hole that we've dug?
and this gets me back to my research.
first of all, i guess we call it smart because it requires no controls and it requires no energy, and that's a very big deal for architecture.
you can see that here by the different reflection on this side.
they breathe through holes in their sides called spiracles, and they bring the air through and it moves through their system to cool them down, and so in this project, i'm trying to look at how we can consider that in architecture too, how we can bring air through holes in the sides of a building.
so i want to leave you with one last impression about the project, or this kind of work and using smart materials.
people low on it like things that are familiar, that are safe and dependable.
if you know about this trait, you can understand a lot of puzzles about human behavior.
you can actually predict what kinds of books they like to read, what kinds of places they like to travel to, and what kinds of food they like to eat.
this trait also tells us a lot about the kinds of groups people join.
what kinds of people would join a global community welcoming people from every discipline and culture, who seek a deeper understanding of the world, and who hope to turn that understanding into a better future for us all?
please raise your hand high right now.
and please raise your hand if you'd say you are right of center or conservative.
this is a bit of a problem.
i was going to ask you which one you picked, but no need.
developmental psychology has shown that kids come into the world already knowing so much about the physical and social worlds, and programmed to make it really easy for them to learn certain things and hard to learn others.
what are the sorts of things that people talk about across disciplines?
it gives us very strong feelings about those who cause harm.
you do find groups in the animal kingdom -- you do find cooperative groups -- but these groups are always either very small or they're all siblings.
it's only among humans that you find very large groups of people who are able to cooperate, join together into groups, but in this case, groups that are united to fight other groups.
but authority in humans is not so closely based on power and brutality, as it is in other primates.
i think this is what we come with, at least a preparedness to learn all of these things.
and how will it end up being different from a kid born 60 miles south of us in lynchburg, virginia?
but look at the other three lines.
we find this in every country we look at.
this effect is so robust that we find it no matter how we ask the question.
we get every person doing whatever he wants, with every aperture of every other person and every other animal.
some of you might recognize this as the '60s.
on the first round, people give about half of the money that they can.
if you want to give some of your own money to punish people who aren't contributing, you can do that."
because i think that the greatest wonder in the world is not the grand canyon.
they want order, even at some cost to those at the bottom.
you find the same thing in hinduism.
there are many high gods in hinduism.
this image actually is both of those gods sharing the same body.
you find the same thing in buddhism.
the struggle between for and against is the mind's worst disease."
do you accept stepping out of the battle of good and evil?
can you be not for or against anything?
am i telling you to not strive?
a lot of the problems we have to solve are problems that require us to change other people.
so i think the point -- the point of my talk, and i think the point of ted -- is that this is a group that is passionately engaged in the pursuit of changing the world for the better.
people here are passionately engaged in trying to make the world a better place.
and so i think that the answer is to use that passionate commitment to the truth to try to turn it into a better future for us all.
if australia had to send a thousand people tomorrow to west papua for example, we don't have a thousand police officers hanging around that could just go tomorrow and we do have a thousand soldiers that could go.
so they are able to do it in that sense.
but they aren't trained in the same way that police officers are and they're certainly not equipped in the same way police officers are.
and so this has raised a bunch of problems for them when dealing with these sorts of issues.
since they're doing some of these same jobs, maybe they should have some of those things.
have they got something hidden under their clothing?
they're going to make their own decisions about who to shoot and who not to shoot without a human in the loop.
military is working on at the moment.
it goes out to a really long distance, compared to any of these other sorts of things.
and anybody who is hit with this feels this sudden burst of heat and just wants to get out of the way.
and they're thinking, well this will be really useful in places like where we need to clear a crowd out of a particular area, if the crowd is being hostile.
if we need to keep people away from a particular place, we can do that with these sorts of things.
but as i said, the military and the police are very different.
yes, you don't have to look very hard at this to recognize the fact that they might be very different.
in particular, the attitude to the use of force and the way they're trained to use force is especially different.
so their attitudes to the use of lethal force are very different, and i think it's fairly obvious that their attitude to the use of non-lethal weapons would also be very different from what it is with the police.
and since we've already had so many problems with police use of non-lethal weapons in various ways, i thought it would be a really good idea to look at some of those things and try to relate it to the military context.
so one of the things i particularly looked at was the use of o.c.
and i went and had a look at some of the figures here.
so i went and looked at all of these police shooting figures.
i could only find these ones.
so you can see there were six deaths sort of leading up to it every year for a number of years.
this person is not doing anything violent, but they just won't do what we want them to.
everything will work out better that way.
one of those problems is that non-lethal weapons may be used indiscriminately.
one of the fundamental principles of military use of force is that you have to be discriminate.
so chechens had come in and taken control of the theater.
and the way they did it was to pump the whole thing full of anesthetic gas.
and it turned out that lots of these hostages actually died as a result of inhaling the gas.
so this was one particular problem they talked about, that it might be used indiscriminately.
another problem that i just want to quickly mention is that there's a whole heap of problems with the way that people actually get taught to use non-lethal weapons and get trained about them and then get tested and so on.
it happened while i was working as a research fellow at the u.s.
and news reports started coming up about this situation where this woman was arguing with the police officer.
and other examples of the same sorts of things with other people where you think where you think, "is this really an appropriate way to use non-lethal weapons?"
what else was i suppose to do?"
and a colleague of mine sent me this one from london.
because police are actually more restrained in the use of force than the military are.
so if you have these problems with police officers with non-lethal weapons, what on earth would make you think it's going to be better with military personnel?
i'm going to have a pretty simple idea that i'm just going to tell you over and over until i get you to believe it, and that is all of us are makers.
and it's a fabulous event to just meet and talk to these people who make things and are there to just show them to you and talk about them and have a great conversation.
am i going to get wet?
am i going to get wet?
am i going to get wet?"
they did that in the summer, and it was very warm.
now this one takes a little bit of explaining.
and here he'll explain a little bit about what it does.
they want to use it to their own purpose.
and i found this old video.
but it was a sense of pride that we made things, that the world around us was made by us.
we made it, and we were connected to it that way.
and i talked to his mom, and i ended up doing a story on him for a magazine called kidrobot.
he liked to take things apart.
but he also moved here to meet other people doing what he's doing.
and this kind of gets to this important idea today.
now that could be a dog door, it could be someone going somewhere where they shouldn't, like a little brother into a little sister's room.
there's all kinds of different things that you can imagine for that.
they will only figure it out by getting their hands on it and playing with it.
think how much money and how many years it took nasa to get satellites into space.
where does he learn about computers?
and he says, "i could go there all day long and talk to people and share ideas for free."
well he did a little bit better than free.
so what do we mean by glamour?
well, one thing you can do if you want to know what glamour means is you can look in the dictionary.
and it actually helps a lot more if you look in a very old dictionary, in this case the 1913 dictionary.
and it involves a great deal of technique.
except that light doesn't work this way in the real world.
you have to have mystery and you have to have grace.
it invites us into the world but it doesn't give us a completely clear picture.
it has that sense of going up and away, and yet you never think about how you would really trip if you were -- particularly going down.
and of course glass block has that sense of translucence.
and in the life of an individual, we often associate that with some object.
this is not always good, because what is your perfect world?
but i also knew how hard they worked all week.
me only existed in the trying.
my body was often in the way.
it was a way of keeping my head attached.
all this time i lived in the city because, to be honest, i was afraid of trees.
i never had babies because heads cannot give birth.
i did this in front of many strangers.
i began to see my body like an ipad or a car.
i took more than my body had to offer.
i heard people murmur from time to time that i should love my body, so i learned how to do this.
as a result of me talking so much about my vagina, many women started to tell me about theirs -- their stories about their bodies.
i heard thousands of stories, and i have to tell you, there was always this moment where the women shared with me that particular moment when she separated from her body -- when she left home.
some women became quiet and disappeared.
in the middle of my traveling, i turned 40 and i began to hate my body, which was actually progress, because at least my body existed enough to hate it.
it was proof that i had not measured up, that i was old and not fabulous and not perfect or able to fit into the predetermined corporate image in shape.
my stomach was proof that i had failed, that it had failed me, that it was broken.
my life became about getting rid of it and obsessing about getting rid of it.
i went outside what i thought i knew.
i heard stories that got inside my body.
i heard about a little girl who couldn't stop peeing on herself because so many grown soldiers had shoved themselves inside her.
i heard an 80-year-old woman whose legs were broken and pulled out of her sockets and twisted up on her head as the soldiers raped her like that.
now i lay down in the grass and i rub my body in it, and i love the mud on my legs and feet.
now i make a daily pilgrimage to visit a particular weeping willow by the seine, and i hunger for the green fields in the bush outside bukavu.
and i am there with the three million in the streets of port-au-prince.
and the fire that burned in me on day three through six of chemo is the fire that is burning in the forests of the world.
and the catheters they shoved into me without proper medication made me scream out the way the earth cries out from the drilling.
in my second chemo, my mother got very sick and i went to see her.
and in the name of connectedness, the only thing she wanted before she died was to be brought home by her beloved gulf of mexico.
so we brought her home, and i prayed that the oil wouldn't wash up on her beach before she died.
and a few weeks later, i was in new orleans, and this beautiful, spiritual friend told me she wanted to do a healing for me.
the flowers make it beautiful, and the honey makes it sweet."
and the other women sang and they prayed for me and my mother.
and as the warm gulf washed over my naked head, i realized that it held the best and the worst of us.
it was all the lies that got told before and after.
it was the honey in the water that made it sweet, it was the oil that made it sick.
it was the tears that were indistinguishable from the gulf that were falling down my cheek.
it was finally being in my body.
it was finding my place and the huge responsibility that comes with connection.
it was my mother leaving, just at the moment that i was being born.
it was wise doctors and advanced medicine and surgeons who knew what to do with their hands.
it was having a vision of the future and something to fight for, because i know this struggle isn't my own.
but how do we do it?
today i'm going to talk to you about the problem of other minds.
so i'm going to tell you three things about this today.
some observations on the slow development of this system as we learn how to do this difficult job.
this is a picture of it.
the second thing i want to say about this brain system is that although we human adults are really good at understanding other minds, we weren't always that way.
it takes children a long time to break into the system.
the first thing i'm going to show you is a change between age three and five, as kids learn to understand that somebody else can have beliefs that are different from their own.
i need a drink with my lunch."
so now joshua goes off to get a drink.
so which one do you think ivan is going to take?
so that's a five-year-old who clearly understands that other people can have false beliefs and what the consequences are for their actions.
why did he take that one?
and so, it is not until age seven that we get what looks more like an adult response.
he says the wind should get in trouble for switching the sandwiches.
so the first thing is that in children we see this same brain region, the right tpj, being used while children are thinking about other people.
so, the first thing that we did is we gave adults a version of the pirate problem that we gave to the kids.
how many people think it was morally permissible for grace to put the powder in the coffee?
and we can compare that to another case, where everything in the real world is the same.
some people think she should deserve more blame, and other people less.
and what i'm going to show you is what happened when we look inside the brains of people while they're making that judgment.
and what you can see is, on the left when there was very little activity in this brain region, people paid little attention to her innocent belief and said she deserved a lot of blame for the accident.
whereas on the right, where there was a lot of activity, people paid a lot more attention to her innocent belief, and said she deserved a lot less blame for causing the accident.
and we do have such a tool.
so their judgments of the case when everything was fine remain the same.
they say she deserves no blame.
but in the case of a failed attempt to harm, where grace thought that it was poison, although it was really sugar, people now say it was more okay, she deserves less blame for putting the powder in the coffee.
and in the case of the accident, where she thought that it was sugar, but it was really poison and so she caused a death, people say that it was less okay, she deserves more blame.
we have a special brain system that lets us think about what other people are thinking.
this system takes a long time to develop, slowly throughout the course of childhood and into early adolescence.
but i want to give the last word back to the novelists, and to philip roth, who ended by saying, "the fact remains that getting people right is not what living is all about anyway.
getting them wrong and wrong and wrong, and then on careful reconsideration, getting them wrong again."
so then seriously, you must lie awake at night sometimes wondering where this work leads.
we knew how brains see, and how they control the body and how they hear and sense.
there is this thing called the hard problem of consciousness, that puzzles a lot of people.
but why does anyone have to feel anything?
why does it seem to require these beings who sense things for us to operate?
because everyone these days wants to know how to slow down, but they want to know how to slow down really quickly.
so i did a spot on cnn the other day where i actually spent more time in makeup than i did talking on air.
because that's kind of the world that we live in now, a world stuck in fast-forward.
every moment of the day feels like a race against the clock.
and if you think about how we to try to make things better, what do we do?
and even things that are by their very nature slow -- we try and speed them up too.
and i wince saying those words now, but my first reaction at the time was very different.
am i really in such a hurry that i'm prepared to fob off my son with a sound byte at the end of the day?"
and by the time i got off that plane, i'd decided i wanted to do something about it.
and i had two questions in my head.
we try and do more and more with less and less time.
we turn every moment of every day into a race to the finish line -- a finish line, incidentally, that we never reach, but a finish line nonetheless.
and i guess that the question is, is it possible to break free from that mindset?
if you think of food, many of you will have heard of the slow food movement.
and out of the slow food movement has grown something called the slow cities movement, which has started in italy, but has spread right across europe and beyond.
and even if they sometimes do nothing at all.
i was actually en route to a dinner held by slow food at the time.
but why is it so hard to slow down?
i think there are various reasons.
are my children growing up right?
or taking the time to look at a problem from all angles in the office to make the best decision at work.
is it possible to slow down?
and i'm happy to be able to say to you that the answer is a resounding yes.
and what that means is that i no longer overload myself gratuitously.
and there too the news is rosy.
they need you to move at their rhythm.
and i now find that bedtime stories used to be a box on my to-do list, something that i dreaded, because it was so slow and i had to get through it quickly.
and i have a kind of hollywood ending to my talk this afternoon, which goes a little bit like this: a few months ago, i was getting ready to go on another book tour, and i had my bags packed.
because it seems to me that finding this uniqueness has to do with dealing with the whole force of globalization; that the particular is central to finding the uniqueness of place and the uniqueness of a program in a building.
and i thought the secret of the site was to make the building of the river, part of the river.
but i was still troubled, and i was troubled because i felt this was capricious.
and this gave birth to the idea of having toroidal generating geometry, one with its center deep in the earth for the landside building and a toroid with its center in the sky for the island building.
every piece of the building works.
you walk through the space, a voice reads the names, ages and place of birth of the children.
and then you descend to light and to the north and to life.
he is on a state visit.
i was very moved by what i saw today.
let's get back to the town and walk to the site."
and then i went away for four months and there was going to be groundbreaking.
and half a million people gathered for the celebrations; you can see them on the site itself as the foundations are beginning.
and there it is under construction; there are 1,800 workers at work and it will be finished in two years.
just cut the whole museum through the mountain -- enter from one side of the mountain, come out on the other side of the mountain -- and then bring light through the mountain into the chambers.
and that was a lot of heat to deal with.
and what i felt about that building is that it really was a building that had to do with a lightness of being -- to quote kundera -- that it had to do with whiteness, it had to do with a certain dynamic quality and it had to do with optimism.
he who considers himself the servant of his fellow beings shall find the joy of self-expression.
i won't be able to tell you what it is until it happens.
i didn't realize there was going to be a little music before.
so i think i'm going to start with what i just heard.
and one of the things that is really sacred about it is that you have no opportunity to think about the future, or the past.
you really are alive right here in this moment.
there are so many decisions being made when you walk on the bandstand.
we had no idea what key we were going to play in.
the only mistake lies in that i'm not able to perceive what it is that someone else did.
the only way that i would say it was a mistake is in that we didn't react to it.
it was an opportunity that was missed.
and i know that i speak for all of us when i tell you that we don't take it for granted.
we know that to be able to come on the bandstand and play music is a blessing.
you have some people who do.
if i come up and i dictate to the band that i want to play like this and i want the music to go this way, and i just jump right in ...
if i really want the music to go there, the best way for me to do it is to listen.
it has far more to do with what i can perceive than what it is that i can do.
so if i want the music to get to a certain level of intensity, the first step for me is to be patient, to listen to what's going on and pull from something that's going on around me.
greetings to all of you from pakistan.
it is often said that we fear that which we do not know.
here are some of the stories they wanted us to share with you.
i hope to become a vet when i grow up so that i can take care of stray cats and dogs who wander around the streets of the village that i live near gilgit, northern pakistan.
do you see me on the other side of this fence?
or can you move beyond my veil and see me for who i truly am inside?
it felt like it was really important.
they went through a lot to get here.
and it has been my home these years.
you can see them off kerala.
one of the best places in the world to see blue whales is here in this region.
i need to explain a little bit about monsoons.
and there are two seasons in most of south asia.
and the way it works is, it comes from the southwest.
so it comes from the southwest.
and then in the winter things cool down.
and the whole system goes into reverse.
they feed on other little things.
and they grow and grow by stages.
and it wanders far and wide.
we know that much about it.
when i first went to the maldives, dead keen on diving, spent as much of my time as i could in and under the water.
and they were there for some time.
and i didn't think anything more of it until the following year, when it happened again, and then the year after that, and then the year after that.
but slowly it began to dawn on me that something rather special was happening.
the trees can put their roots into it.
humans can dig holes and make a well.
i got a little bit curious.
and the first thing i did was started recording when they turned up in the maldives.
so, next thing i did is i got on the phone.
but they are coming 400 miles across the ocean, against the wind.
how on earth are they doing that?
the next thing i did was i started counting dragonflies.
i wanted to know about their seasonality, what time of year, this is when they first arrive, but how long are they around for?
and there is a front between them, and the front moves.
i can be in the southwest monsoon.
there is nothing for them in maldives.
what on earth are they doing?
and then they run out of land.
but most of them are going to carry on.
and next stop, perhaps only four or five days away is going to be east africa.
and the clever thing is the wind is always converging to where the rain is.
there is more to the story.
this is a rather special bird.
but then the being sensible stopped.
and they are not the only one that makes the crossing.
this time of year they cross back to africa.
they make use of exactly the same winds.
they travel at exactly the same time with the same winds to make the crossing.
i know they travel at the same altitude.
in the middle of the night.
this one has a nice blue cheek.
i last did a tedtalk i think about seven years ago or so.
people have been coming up to me ever since to ask me questions about spaghetti sauce, which is a wonderful thing in the short term -- but it's proven to be less than ideal over seven years.
and so i thought i would tell a story about someone who made one of the most precious objects of his era.
and i mean that in its fullest sense of the word.
it was like manna from heaven.
here was an army that had just had experience in the first world war, where millions of men fought each other in the trenches, getting nowhere, making no progress, and here someone had come up with a device that allowed them to fly up in the skies high above enemy territory and destroy whatever they wanted with pinpoint accuracy.
military who genuinely thought that this single device was going to spell the difference between defeat and victory when it came to the battle against the nazis and against the japanese.
well god's will was that the amount of suffering in any kind of war be reduced to as small an amount as possible.
well it allowed you to do that.
it allowed you to bomb only those things that you absolutely needed and wanted to bomb.
so in the years leading up to the second world war, the u.s.
so what happens during the second world war?
well because we live in an age where there are lots and lots of norden bombsights.
we live in a time where there are all kinds of really, really smart people running around, saying that they've invented gadgets that will forever change our world.
but we need to be very clear about how little that means.
you know what the answer was?
they could have destroyed this little thing right here from 25,000 ft.
that's always been the harder problem when it comes to fighting wars.
or take the battle in afghanistan.
and this is the problem with our infatuation with the things we make.
we think the things we make can solve our problems, but our problems are much more complex than that.
it would have broken his heart.
you can -- i can compete for your attention with the strange pictures that you see on screen that come from there.
i thought i'd talk a little bit about some just big ideas about this, and then get john back out here so we can talk interactively a little bit more and think and ask questions.
and i think the answer to that is always going to be at least driven to a certain extent by the people initially crazy enough to start the project, you know.
so i can give you a little bit of first background just on me and what moved me as a -- really going back as far as a teenager and then an adult, to actually try and build this kind of thing.
i was just always trying to make things.
i was just obsessed with taking things apart and building things, and just anything i could do with my hands or with wood or electronics or metal or anything else.
i thought it would be neat to do that.
and so i got up in the ceiling and i cut through the ceiling joists, much to my parents' delight, and put the door, you know, being pulled up through the ceiling.
you can imagine the amount of time that it took me to do this to the house and the displeasure of my parents.
and so for me that was the thing that was so enticing.
i just wanted this place where you could build things.
and so i think you see that in the genesis of what has happened with second life, and i think it's important.
i thought that might be a fun thing to talk about for a second.
why do we as people want to do that?
and in fact, it's going to be so different than what we see here on earth that anything is going to be possible.
you can find exactly the same articles written about everything that people are observing.
so it gives you an idea of scale.
you know when you can do anything in a space and you know when you can't.
the last big thought is that it is almost certainly true that whatever this is going to evolve into is going to be bigger in total usage than the web itself.
i'd say i kind of think about the world as being information.
you can do tests that show that you'll remember that i was talking about a chair a couple of days later a lot better.
you are always there with other people.
maybe the solution there involves talking to other people in real time.
so let me stop there and bring john back, and maybe we can just have a longer conversation.
the answer is no, and i think the reason why is because the web itself as a good example is profoundly bottoms-up.
jh: give me a story of a tool you created at the beginning in second life that you were pretty sure people would want to use in the creation of their avatars or in communicating that people actually in practice said, no, i'm not interested in that at all, and name something that you didn't come up with that almost immediately people began to demand.
it was just this idea that you could kind of have a private chat.
i just remember it was one of those examples of data-driven design.
so when it only had 16, it was only about as big as this college campus.
and we laid out the zoning, but of course, people could build all around it however they wanted to.
you can have a baby in second life.
and then the second one is -- if they feel like it, and they're not going to do it in every case, but in many they are -- they want to actually be able to sell that creation as a way of providing for their own livelihood.
and so part of what we see is the same evolution of human behavior that you see in emerging societies.
there are going to be big changes.
as a frenchman, i must say that there are a lot of french intellectuals that think happiness is not at all interesting.
we need to live with passion.
and that can also come from some kind of confusions.
one of the most common ones is happiness and pleasure.
like, you can feel intense pleasure and some others around you can be suffering a lot.
because we are speaking of a different level.
look at the waves coming here to shore.
when you are at the bottom of the wave, you hit the bottom.
just the mere fact of doing that fills such a sense of adequation with our deep nature.
and we would like to be like that all the time.
for that we have to ask, what is nature of mind?
that is the ground for mind training.
you could go from love to hate.
so can we do that with human qualities?
and then, the rest of their life, they will do that three or four hours a day.
we think of people suffering, we think of people we love, but at some point, it can be a state which is all pervading.
that this is not just a luxury.
we do all kinds of things to remain beautiful.
just this one example is worth a lot of work.
and just, i leave you with the beauty of those looks that tells more about happiness than i could ever say.
all humans share some common bits of dna, passed down to us from our african ancestors.
and i'm going to tell you a little bit about later on.
you walk down the street in any big city, you travel like that, and you are amazed at the diversity in the human species.
how do we explain that diversity?
first one is really a question of origins.
i'm asking about our human ancestry, things that we would recognize as being like us if they were sitting here in the room.
because if we go far enough back, we share a common ancestry with every living thing on earth.
what do i mean by that?
that means that not all three could be my direct ancestor.
a point beyond which you don't know anything else about your ancestors, and you enter this dark and mysterious realm we call history that we have to feel our way through with whispered guidance.
who were these people who came before?
if you share a marker with someone, it means you share an ancestor at some point in the past, the person who first had that change in their dna.
turn them on their sides, combine them so that they look like a tree with the root at the bottom and the branches going up.
that tells us we were all still living in africa at that time.
why was it that we seem to have come out of africa so recently?
so what was going on here?
we were hanging on by our fingernails.
the evidence is that the human way of life didn't change that much during that period.
and they got really excited about it.
you know, the study of human origins is kind of in our dna, and we want to take it to the next level.
what do you want to do next?"
which is a great question to be asked by national geographic.
people who have lived in the same location for a long period of time retain a connection to the place where they live that many of the rest of us have lost.
you can test your own dna.
so how are we doing on the project?
and now they're going to be poured back into the egg.
and we all know in our heart of hearts that this is not the way the universe works.
and we know in our heart of hearts that the universe does not travel from mush to complexity.
and all of that happens in the first second.
that's twice as long as humans have been on this planet.
and this is how it works.
that operates over smaller scales than gravity, which explains why you and i are smaller than stars or planets.
it was just the right distance from its star to contain huge oceans of open water.
and we can see this happening over the last four billion years.
and i believe we count as a threshold in this great story.
now what makes humans different is human language.
i hope you agree that this is a powerful story.
and the same weapons are still here, and they are still armed.
so what big history can do is show us the nature of our complexity and fragility and the dangers that face us, but it can also show us our power with collective learning.
i thank you for your attention.
and then they blame the banks for being the bad guys who gave them the mortgages.
how many of you have iphones?
what if you lose your iphone?
how many of you have kids?
i see a lot of hands coming down.
and i know it sounds crazy.
how many of you spend a thousand dollars a year on lotteries?
so that tells us that the people not in this room are spending more than a thousand to get the average to a thousand.
low-income people spend a lot more than a thousand on lotteries.
so where does it take us?
and what i'm going to talk about today is save more tomorrow.
they cannot have money go away from their paycheck into a 401 plan before they see it, before they can touch it.
and then they have to decide how they're going to invest in their 52 choices, and they never heard about what is a money market fund.
take out those who say they save too little.
one out of 10 are saving enough.
we think we have a problem of people saving too much.
what are we going to do about it?
and during the break there would be a snack and you could choose bananas or chocolate.
and then count down the days and see what people ended up eating.
the same people that imagined themselves eating the bananas ended up eating chocolates a week later.
we know we should be saving.
christmas is coming, we might as well buy a lot of gifts for everyone we know.
are we going to make them automatically join the plan, or are they going to be left out?
why have you taken our apple?
you would hate to go to the atm, take out 100 dollars and notice that you lost one of those $20 bills.
save more tomorrow invites employees to save more maybe next year -- sometime in the future when we can imagine ourselves eating bananas, volunteering more in the community, exercising more and doing all the right things on the planet.
save more tomorrow makes it easy.
but what are we going to do about the monkeys and loss aversion?
maybe we should make people save more when they make more money.
saving more today is not an option.
we invited them to save three percentage points more every time they get a pay raise.
i want, really, to think about the fact that saving four times more is a huge difference in terms of the lifestyle that people will be able to afford.
if you think about people and mortgages and buying houses and then not being able to pay for it, we need to think about that.
we've got a lot to do, a lot to solve, also in the retirement area when it comes to what people do with their money after retirement.
how many of you feel you have a solid plan for the future when it comes to post-retirement decisions.
we are they might be giants.
so we don't know that much about the history of violinists but we do know that when we entered the state of new jersey there is an uptick in violence.
we want to get in as many songs as possible during our brief time here so this is the one to play.
i want to talk to ...
i want to talk to the amazing randi.
i thought i had better change.
so how many people who saw the film did not get that here was a woman in love, that she was completely innocent and saw great joy in her life, and she was youthful?
and how many of you did not get that?
so i've got to get there and be in complete panic.
when i was a kid -- i was about eight years old.
at school i was being just taught about physics, and i was told that if there is something that exists, then it is measurable.
and i would lie there crying at night because my imagination could not touch creativity.
but all before that there was a woodcutter.
so every time, i could tell my story again and again and get over this problem, and so i got over the problem.
a story is our -- all of us -- we are the stories we tell ourselves.
in this universe, and this existence, where we live with this duality of whether we exist or not and who are we, the stories we tell ourselves are the stories that define the potentialities of our existence.
we are the stories we tell ourselves.
we tell our stories, and a person without a story does not exist.
so einstein told a story and followed his stories and came up with theories and came up with theories and then came up with his equations.
alexander had a story that his mother used to tell him, and he went out to conquer the world.
but that puts some kind of burden on me.
i have to tell a story in a much more elaborate way, but i have the potential.
and i look for stories on each level.
now, it is not necessary that these stories agree with each other.
because she fell in love with walter raleigh, she was giving up the reasons she was a queen, and then walter raleigh fell in love with her lady in waiting, and she had to decide whether she was a queen going to war or she wanted...
there was philip ii, who was divine because he was always praying, and there was elizabeth, who was divine, but not quite divine because she thought she was divine, but the blood of being mortal flowed in her.
and so they helped the just one.
and the two divine people fought, and the gods were on the side of divinity.
i was trying to find a mythic reason to make the film.
so can we have that second?
you dare to keep secrets from me?
you go to your traitor brother and leave me to my business.
this is not the queen i love and serve.
what am i doing with the architecture?
the stone is bigger than her because stone is an organic.
so how do i start all this?
about ten years ago, i heard this little thing from a politician, not a politician that was very well respected in india.
and an idea started to develop.
so how does that become a story?
they started to build flyovers to get from a to b faster, but they effectively went from one area of relative wealth to another area of relative wealth.
and then what they did was they created a city above the flyovers.
and the rich people moved to the upper city and left the poorer people in the lower cities, about 10 to 12 percent of the people have moved to the upper city.
it says that the rich are always sitting on the shoulders and survive on the shoulders of the poor.
but i can go on about telling you how we evolve stories, and how stories effectively are who we are and how these get translated into the particular discipline that i am in, which is film.
and all of us are constantly looking for harmony.
when you get up, the night and day is a contradiction.
but you get up at 4 a.m.
that first blush of blue is where the night and day are trying to find harmony with each other.
i grew up on a small farm in missouri.
we lived on less than a dollar a day for about 15 years.
i was going to work with small farmers.
i was going to work on international development, and then i took a turn and ended up here.
you might end up driving a taxicab.
you could be in new york.
i found out how many people had been put in jail, how many family members had been killed.
i assessed how long they were going to stay and how much it would take to feed them.
and i got really good at predicting how many body bags you would need for the people who were going to die in these camps.
we did our first million-dollars-worth of trade by buying on 30 days and selling on 21.
and the people who made money from brazil nuts were not the people who made money from cutting the forests.
we needed to be working on beef.
we needed to be working on lumber.
we may be able to use them differently.
this is where we stand today.
a lot of people like to point to some place else as the cause of the problem.
you think that's not a question as to how we should be using the earth's resources?
we need to use less to make more.
and then we need to use less again.
all of those things are part of that equation.
it depends on who produced it and how, in every single instance.
we need groups to work together that never have.
we have to work in these places.
there must be a better way.
if we work with those, if we change those companies and the way they do business, then the rest will happen automatically.
in fact, these names start coming up over and over again.
we can get our arms around a hundred companies.
we need to begin to work with industries.
the study shows that the highest net present value for palm oil is on land that's been degraded.
all the palm oil going there is good.
the rest of the land can be used for something else.
if you take a look just at water, what we see is that, with four very common products, you look at how much a farmer produced to make those products, and then you look at how much water input was put into them, and then you look at what the farmer was paid.
if you divide the amount of water into what the farmer was paid, the farmer didn't receive enough money to pay a decent price for water in any of those commodities.
we have to really begin to change the way we think about everything.
this is my first trip, my first foreign trip as a first lady.
and while this is not my first visit to the u.k., i have to say that i am glad that this is my first official visit.
and although the circumstances of our lives may seem very distant, with me standing here as the first lady of the united states of america, and you, just getting through school, i want you to know that we have very much in common.
there is nothing in my story that would land me here.
i was raised on the south side of chicago.
my father was a city worker all of his life, and my mother was a stay-at-home mom.
and she stayed at home to take care of me and my older brother.
but even as it got harder for him to walk and get dressed in the morning -- i saw him struggle more and more -- my father never complained about his struggle.
he just woke up a little earlier and worked a little harder.
and my brother and i were raised with all that you really need: love, strong values and a belief that with a good education and a whole lot of hard work, that there was nothing that we could not do.
i am an example of what's possible when girls from the very beginning of their lives are loved and nurtured by the people around them.
and my mother, the most important role model in my life, who lives with us at the white house and helps to care for our two little daughters, malia and sasha.
the men in my life taught me some important things, as well.
they taught me about what it means to be a father and to raise a family.
and not only to invest in your own home but to reach out and help raise kids in the broader community.
and when we first met, one of the things that i remember is that he took me out on a date.
he worked, helping people to find jobs and to try to bring resources into struggling neighborhoods.
what he said, that all too often, is that we accept the distance between those two ideas.
and i think about that today because i am reminded and convinced that all of you in this school are very important parts of closing that gap.
you are the women who will build the world as it should be.
because communities and countries and ultimately the world are only as strong as the health of their women.
the difference between a struggling family and a healthy one is often the presence of an empowered woman or women at the center of that family.
the difference between a broken community and a thriving one is often the healthy respect between men and women who appreciate the contributions each other makes to society.
they knew no other way to live than to follow their dreams.
and by getting a good education, you too can control your own destiny.
i liked getting my work done.
i thought being smart was cooler than anything in the world.
you too can pave the way.
you too can realize your dreams, and then your job is to reach back and to help someone just like you do the same thing.
history proves that it doesn't matter whether you come from a council estate or a country estate.
that is the reality of the world that we live in.
you now have control over your own destiny.
but you have everything you need.
my husband works in this big office.
because we are counting on you.
we are counting on every single one of you to be the very best that you can be.
we know you can do it.
and the breath, the breath is the captain of that vessel.
i wanted a place that i would have total silence and total solitude.
and i thought, but this is a place of total quiet and silence.
so i closed my eyes, i took breath and the first thing that came up and out was "summertime," porgy and bess.
you see there are different lines: you choose in your own tempo in your own way to follow the line, but you must respect it, more or less.
so i would like to share this piece with you.
how can we measure what makes a school system work?
we have such a hard time figuring out that learning is not a place but an activity.
the trouble is that measuring how much time people spend in school or what degree they have got is not always a good way of seeing what they can actually do.
so with pisa, we try to change this by measuring the knowledge and skills of people directly.
yellow is so-so, and in green are the countries doing really well.
you can also see that there is a gap of almost three and a half school years between 15-year-olds in shanghai and 15-year-olds in chile, and the gap grows to seven school years when you include the countries with really poor performance.
there's a world of difference in the way in which young people are prepared for today's economy.
but actually, if you look at how countries come out on this picture, you see there are a lot of countries that actually are combining excellence with equity.
if money would tell you everything about the quality of learning outcomes, you would find all the large bubbles at the top, no?
one way you can spend money is by paying teachers well, and you can see korea investing a lot in attracting the best people into the teaching profession.
last but not least, koreans want their teachers not only to teach but also to develop.
but even luxembourg can spend its money only once, and the price for this is that teachers are not paid particularly well.
and basically, teachers have little time to do anything else than teaching.
so you can see two countries spent their money very differently, and actually how they spent their money matters a lot more than how much they invest in education.
so you ask yourself, if education has become so much more expensive, has it become so much better?
and remember, germany, we used to be one of those countries that comes out very well when you just count people who have degrees.
for example, traditionally, the education of the very young children was seen as the business of families, and you would have cases where women were seen as neglecting their family responsibilities when they sent their children to kindergarten.
and you can see other countries as well.
how do countries pay their teachers relative to other highly skilled workers?
would you want your child to become a teacher rather than a lawyer?
you won't believe it, but there are countries in which the most attractive place to be is not the shopping center but the school.
but placing a high value on education is just part of the picture.
the other part is the belief that all children are capable of success.
you have some countries where students are segregated early in their ages.
nine out of 10 japanese students say that it depends on my own investment, on my own effort, and that tells you a lot about the system that is around them.
and they provide intelligent pathways for teachers to grow in their careers.
and how do they do that?
but its strength lies in telling them what everybody else has been doing.
it has taken away excuses from those who are complacent.
feeling like the world is becoming less friendly?
so i thought this morning i would try to be the optimist, and give reason to hope for the future of the internet by drawing upon its present.
now, it may seem like there is less hope today than there was before.
how many people have ever hitchhiked?
so that's one reason to think that we might be declensionists, going in the wrong direction.
but i want to give you three examples to try to say that the trend line is in fact in the other direction, and it's the internet helping it along.
you might have had a french club or a debate club.
but they had an amazing freedom, which was they didn't have to make any money from it.
no one pays you to do this.
instead, again, it is as if we are all sitting together in a theater, but we can only see amidst the fog the people immediately around us.
so what do we do to figure out who is where?
we turn to the person on the right, and we tell that person what we see on our left, and vice versa.
there was a video there that the government did not like and they wanted to make sure it was blocked.
and it turns out that as you look at the postmortem of this event, you have at one moment perfectly working youtube.
and they came together to help find the problem and fix it.
so it's kind of like if your house catches on fire.
the bad news is there is no fire brigade.
i was trying to think of the right model to describe this form of random acts of kindness by geeky strangers.
and it turns out this model is everywhere, once you start looking for it.
he would pay people money because he was feeling like a good guy, and the money would go to the people and they would write the articles.
i am not making this up.
and you just bring your problems to the page.
it turns out there are more people checking this page for problems and wanting to solve them than there are problems arising on the page.
the film, without his permission or even knowledge at first, found its way onto the internet.
you could see arguments on both sides.
they just didn't think it was the right thing to do.
it was an act of kindness.
and to this day, the page for star wars kid has a warning right at the top that says you are not to put his real name on the page.
if you do, it will be removed immediately, removed by people who may have disagreed with the original decision, but respect the outcome and work to make it stay because they believe in something bigger than their own opinion.
you send in a picture of your cat if it looks like hitler.
but then you hit this one.
image removed at request of owner.
image removed at request of owner.
i even think it can go into the real world.
and that person taking the photo can make a decision about how and whether to respect it.
now why are people using it?
and when you go on it, if you listen and see carefully and closely enough, what you will discover is that that information is saying something to you.
i was a guest student during one month of a public health course.
the course was good, but it was not the course content in itself that changed the mindset.
and i studied very much in sweden.
and the fact was that indian students studied harder than we did in sweden.
in sweden we read it once and then we went partying.
and that, to me, that personal experience was the first time in my life that the mindset i grew up with was changed.
and i realized that perhaps the western world will not continue to dominate the world forever.
and i think many of you have the same sort of personal experience.
it's that realization of someone you meet that really made you change your ideas about the world.
and you can see my map if i get it up here.
and we will think about that when we look at the wider picture of the world in 1858.
and i will start the world like this.
and you can see that the countries who were growing their economy was united states and united kingdom.
can you see how it starts to move there?
and we are moving into the new world.
what happens in the after independence?
you can see that the health started to improve.
children started to go to school.
and both countries had the better health, but still a very low economy.
and they decided to go not only for health and education, but also starting to grow their economy.
this is the big question today.
my friends at gapminder wanted me to show this because there is a new leader in washington who is really concerned about the health system.
is so rich over there but they are not as healthy as kerala.
i can see a business opportunity for kerala, helping fix the health system in the united states.
now here we have the whole world.
but most of the world in the middle are pushing forwards very fast.
and we shall see what will happen with these countries.
you see it came down there.
and it seems this is another rock coming down there, you know.
and there is no doubt that fast catch up can take place.
will the former rich countries really accept a completely changed world economy, and a shift of power away from where it has been the last 50 to 100 to 150 years, back to asia?
and will asia be able to handle that new position of being in charge of being the most mighty, and the governors of the world?
rich countries have been sending aid to poor countries for the last 60 years.
and you can see this book, written by someone who worked in the world bank for 20 years, and he finds economic growth in this country to be elusive.
in my mind, there is something to learn from the history of europe.
and they demanded authorities from -- to come down from their high horses.
but if you look, if you have that perspective, then you can see what happened in the last 60 years.
the authorities did not have the reason to make economic growth happen so that they could tax people and make more money for to run their business.
because they were getting it from abroad.
if citizens can network and make themselves more organized and productive, so that their voices are heard, so then things would improve.
but one time it broke down.
there was a war going on in my country.
and one time my mother asked me to get some medicine for a younger sibling.
so the point is that we could only -- the only way we could depend on each other, is if we can connect with each other.
and if we are neighbors, i could just walk over to his house.
there were a lot of reasons people told me why we don't have enough telephones.
the work pays them a salary; the salary allows them to pay for the car over time.
so we could do that for telephones.
you should be raising income and let people decide what they want to do with their money.
but the real problem is the lack of other infrastructures.
i mean, of course there might be other good reasons, but this was one of the reasons -- they had to be.
what is it that they really do?
if you think it can be done, come and make it happen."
after about a million -- i mean, i got rejected from lots of places, because i was not only trying to go to a poor country, i was trying to go to the poor of the poor country.
this is what some people think.
what about the rest of the pie?
so we have these stars going around in circles like this.
in fact, there appears to be about ten times as much mass here in the form of this invisible or dark matter as there is in the ordinary matter, ok.
it would be nice if we could see this dark matter a little bit more directly.
can we see it more visually?
and so let me lead you through how we can do this.
how do we see that galaxy?
so this light ray will not continue in a straight line, but would rather bend and could end up going into our eye.
is there any other ray of light that could make into the observer's eye from that galaxy?
i see people going down like this.
are there any other rays of light that could make it into the eye?
because it turns out that there is a kind of lens that we can devise, that has the right shape to produce this kind of effect.
and so the next thing you need to do in your experiment is grab a napkin.
and you can put it on top of any image.
so this is the closest you can get to kind of seeing at least the effects of the dark matter with your naked eye.
so we need something to be able to explain that.
there are really two mysteries out there as to what makes up most of the universe, and they have very different effects.
do we have anything for dark matter?
or it could be something completely different.
so a crystal that will ring if that happens.
so one of my colleagues up the road and his collaborators have built such a detector.
so i decided to do something about it.
and what was so sad about this particular story was that once their parents had found out -- and don't forget, their parents took them to the doctor -- the parents threw them out on the street.
they started with two and they ended with two.
and they are having great fun.
so we need a better product.
and i think, if i can just borrow this camera, i was going to show you my invention, which i came up with.
you load it up in the normal way.
you know, i think there might be some presentations that will go over my head, but the most amazing concepts are the ones that go right under my feet.
to watch them move is a dance i'm never going to get tired of.
it reminds us that we are a part of nature and we need to take care of it.
this is what i would tell you to remember if you ever forget this again.
this is what happens every year.
this is what keeps its promise.
there is lots of showing off.
there is lots of love in the air.
and one time he came up to me -- he was about seven or eight years old -- he came up to me.
and he came up to me and he knocked.
he would come every day with something to show me.
and he asked me how i had made the house for those wasps, because he had never seen one this big.
and we looked at it together.
but it occurred to me, how in his small life had he already believed the myth that if something was that well done, that we must have done it.
we're not the first ones to build houses for our young.
but in fact they are doing them in a way that have allowed them to live gracefully on this planet for billions of years.
what i'd like to do is show you a few of the things that they're learning.
he happened to be a birder.
we're not the first ones to have to protect ourselves from some bacteria.
so how does it keep its body free of bacteria build-up?
and the fog comes in and it builds up on the tips.
and it goes down the sides and goes into the critter's mouth.
none of these are using the organisms.
there are many many ways that nature filters water that takes salt out of water.
we take water and push it against a membrane.
nature does something much more elegant.
and it finds many many ways to put many functions into it.
one of our major inventions that we need to be able to do to come even close to what these organisms can do is to find a way to minimize the amount of material, the kind of material we use, and to add design to it.
we use five polymers in the natural world to do everything that you see.
nature has been doing that for a long time.
they are looking at how ants and bees find their food and their flowers in the most effective way as a whole hive.
they're thinking about putting it on the insides of buildings to move water up without pumps.
how can we do what life has learned to do?
and i would encourage you all to please go to it.
so today i'm going to talk about some things that you might not know about the epidemic, and i'm actually also going to challenge some of these things that you think that you do know.
and i'm not really going to talk much about the economy.
but this talk is going to be about understanding facts about the epidemic.
and the first thing that i want to talk about, the first thing i think we need to understand is: how do people respond to the epidemic?
and so i think that we really feel like then people should have less sex.
and in fact among gay men in the us we did see that kind of change in the 1980s.
it's a huge change in a very short period of time.
people are learning more things about it.
we see almost no change in sexual behavior.
but i'm going to argue that you shouldn't be surprised by this, and that to understand this you need to think about health the way than an economist does -- as an investment.
and one part of that benefit is how much longer you think this program is going to be active.
but your health decisions are the same.
but how much you want to invest is going to depend on how much longer you expect to live in the future, even if you don't make those investments.
people really like to have sex.
but we really need to test that.
and a great way to test that is to look across areas in africa and see: do people with more life expectancy change their sexual behavior more?
and so people who live in areas with a lot of malaria are going to have lower life expectancy than people who live in areas with limited malaria.
so one way to test to see whether we can explain some of this behavior change by differences in life expectancy is to look and see is there more behavior change in areas where there's less malaria.
this is not just through malaria.
young women who live in areas with high maternal mortality change their behavior less in response to hiv than young women who live in areas with low maternal mortality.
so by itself, i think this tells a lot about how people behave.
it tells us something about why we see limited behavior change in africa.
but it also tells us something about policy.
but it also tells us something about one of these facts that we talked about before.
so the other thing that i think we learn here is that aids is not going to fix itself.
and a great way to learn about policy is to look at what worked in the past.
we know they had this campaign.
other places have tried things, so why don't we look at those places and see what happened to their prevalence?
we have no way to figure out what happened over time.
now in the last few years, we actually have done some good testing.
but this leaves us with a big gap in our knowledge.
so this is a problem for policy.
it was a problem for my research.
not a lot of other diseases have that profile.
botswana is a place with a lot of aids, egypt is a place without a lot of aids.
so this is another way to see this.
you can see that for the prevalence to be as high as unaids says, we have to really see 60 deaths per 10,000 rather than 20 deaths per 10,000 in this age group.
i'm going to talk a little bit in a minute about how we can use this kind of information to learn something that's going to help us think about the world.
but this also tells us that one of these facts that i mentioned in the beginning may not be quite right.
but it does suggest that that number might be a little big.
but it also tells us something about one of these things that we think that we know.
but now i want to actually also question that.
but there was actually something else that happened in uganda in this period.
and then actually they track each other a little bit on the increase later in the decade.
and if it was only 50 percent as effective as we think that it was, then there are all sorts of other things maybe we should be spending our money on instead.
there are tons of other things that we should think about doing.
and maybe this tells us that we should be thinking more about those things.
i hope that in the last 16 minutes i've told you something that you didn't know about aids, and i hope that i've gotten you questioning a little bit some of the things that you did know.
and i hope that i've convinced you maybe that it's important to understand things about the epidemic in order to think about policy.
and the thing that's most exciting about that is every time i think about research, there are more questions.
there are more things that i think that i want to do.
let me begin with my parents.
they belonged to boys who would join business and inherit business from parents, and girls would be dolled up to get married.
we were four girls and no boys.
and my parents were part of a landed property family.
he sent us to one of the best schools in the city and gave us the best education.
they just get the school which parents choose for them.
so this is the foundation time which i got.
i grew up like this, and so did my other three sisters.
and my father used to say at that time, "i'm going to spread all my four daughters in four corners of the world."
so we are four of us in four corners of the world.
and since i said they're my role models, i followed two things which my father and mother gave me.
but that response comes out of those 90 points.
because all of my best school friends were getting dolled up to get married with a lot of dowry, and here i was with a tennis racket and going to school and doing all kinds of extracurricular activities.
i thought i must tell you this.
but i joined the indian police service, and then it was a new pattern of policing.
how do i prevent the 10 and never make it more than 10?
so this was how it came into my service, and it was different from the men.
i didn't want to make it different from the men, but it was different, because this was the way i was different.
i now went to a prison assignment as a police officer.
here i got a prison assignment.
this was a prison assignment which was one big den of criminals.
and then how did i deal with them?
nine to eleven, every prisoner went into the education program -- the same den in which they thought they would put me behind the bar and things would be forgotten.
it was the beginning of a change.
i want to show you some moments of history in my journey, which probably you would never ever get to see anywhere in the world.
one thousand prisoners who sat in meditation.
this was one of the most courageous steps i took as a prison governor.
let me show you the next slide.
this is how a prisoner drew how they felt about the prison.
there was no time to waste.
or i was one of the people who did it.
that thing is called a captcha.
but the best part is the message that the yahoo help desk got about 20 minutes later.
this person thought they needed to wait.
this of course, is not as bad as this poor person.
when i first heard this, i was quite proud of myself.
but then i started feeling bad.
so then i started feeling bad.
but then i started thinking, is there any way we can use this effort for something that is good for humanity?
so can we get you to do useful work for those 10 seconds?
so let me explain how this works.
basically the way this works is you start with an old book.
it gives you an image for every page of the book.
the next step in the process is that the computer needs to be able to decipher all of the words in this image.
and now the reason we have two words nowadays instead of one is because, you see, one of the words is a word that the system just got out of a book, it didn't know what it was, and it's going to present it to you.
so what we do is we give you another word, one for which the system does know the answer.
and if you type the correct word for the one for which the system already knows the answer, it assumes you are human, and it also gets some confidence that you typed the other word correctly.
and if we repeat this process to like 10 different people and all of them agree on what the new word is, then we get one more word digitized accurately.
so this is how the system works.
and this is all being done one word at a time by just people typing captchas on the internet.
johnedwards.com so we keep on insulting people left and right everyday.
some of them are very cute.
so this is the favorite thing that i like about this whole project.
let me tell you about one that i'm most excited about.
this is something that we've been semi-quietly working on for the last year and a half or so.
well the problem with that is that it's not yet good enough and it probably won't be for the next 15 to 20 years.
it makes a lot of mistakes.
so let me show you an example of something that was translated with a machine.
it was somebody who was trying to ask a question about javascript.
then comes the first part of the question.
so now the next question you may have is, well why can't we just pay people to do this?
so it would be very expensive.
the first one is a lack of bilinguals.
the other problem you're going to run into is a lack of motivation.
so how are we going to motivate them to do it for free?
now when we were starting to think about this, we were blocked by these two things.
but then we realized, there's actually a way to solve both these problems with the same solution.
and that is to transform language translation into something that millions of people want to do, and that also helps with the problem of lack of bilinguals, and that is language education.
now the crazy thing about this method is that it actually really works.
people really can learn a language with it.
and they learn it about as well as the leading language learning software.
so people really do learn a language.
because you see with duolingo, people are actually learning with real content.
so people really do learn a language.
so let me show you one example.
now the thing that i'm most excited about with duolingo is i think this provides a fair business model for language education.
but the magical thing here is that they're paying with their time, but that is time that would have had to have been spent anyways learning the language.
we haven't yet launched, but if you go there, you can sign up to be part of our private beta, which is probably going to start in about three or four weeks.
stay in the moment
people have been debating the causes of happiness for a really long time, in fact for thousands of years, but it seems like many of those debates remain unresolved.
which leaves the question, what are the big causes of happiness?
what i'd like to do with the rest of my time with you today is talk a little bit about one of the areas that we've been investigating, and that's mind-wandering.
this ability to focus our attention on something other than the present is really amazing.
it allows us to learn and plan and reason in ways that no other species of animal can.
and yet it's not clear what the relationship is between our use of this ability and our happiness.
it would make a lot of sense.
in other words, maybe the pleasures of the mind allow us to increase our happiness with mind-wandering.
so how could this be happening?
the cause has to come before the effect.
how does that depend on what people are doing?
so here i was in 2008 wondering where i was in my life.
and i was thinking, how many terrorists could i possibly play before turning into one myself?
but maybe it was time to prove to myself, yes, it's important to understand the past, it is important to look at it in a different light, but maybe we should look at the strengths in our own culture and build on those foundations in the present.
and they had traveled from near, they had traveled from far, because they wanted to make their voices heard.
inflated results started coming in and the mob was starting to get out of control.
and i realized it had to come from the people.
the sounds of the voices were harmonious.
but when it comes down to it, ghana found itself in the same place in which the u.s.
i kind of needed a change.
and i moved down to la jolla and learned how to surf.
and i started living down there on the beach for a long time.
and i realized, the roots of the way i sort of thought was just the only natural way to think about things.
but what he was trying to do was to pump all the air out of there, and see what would happen inside there.
i make them all the time.
and the religious people said that if god wanted you to make -- i mean, god is everywhere, that was one of their rules, is god is everywhere.
i do that on the weekend.
and that was fine with boyle.
and there was all kind of people that would come to the royal society, they called it.
so they were -- the really important part of this was, you were not supposed to talk about final causes, for instance.
and god was out of the picture.
you were not supposed to talk about anything that you couldn't demonstrate.
and so you can start making up some rules.
but the general idea that you could only -- you could only really talk about things in that place that had some kind of experimental basis.
it was 300,000, probably, years ago that most of us, the ancestors of most of us in this room came up out of africa and turned to the left.
not a whole lot of people doing this stuff.
i was thinking about making my own little rockets.
i wanted it to go out of sight and then i wanted this little parachute to come back with the frog in it.
that was her -- you know, that was kind of the worst thing that could happen to us.
just to see what would happen, if you mixed it together.
and i said, there is a way to get a frog up to where he wants to go.
there's a lot of little things involved in making a rocket that it will actually work, even after you have the fuel.
we should have been, because it made a lot of smoke and it made a lot of noise, and it was powerful, you know.
and then you figure out better and better ways to do it.
so you have to be honest.
and they weren't the curious little boys that liked to put frogs up in the air.
but a lot of people got in it for the money and the power and the travel.
and most responsible people that measure temperatures realize you have to shield your measuring device from that.
if you really get down to it, they say, the sun puts out a certain amount of energy -- we know how much that is -- it falls on the earth, the earth gives back a certain amount.
they had to be very cautious.
remember the 10 things that are going to get you.
i started to realize that i could look at the whole city as a living organism.
i also started looking around in the city and trying to photograph them.
then i started going into the tunnels, which made me realize that there's a whole new dimension to the city that i never saw before and most people don't get to see.
when i got comfortable in the space, it also felt like a big playground.
i would climb up the tanks and hop across exposed beams as if i went back in time and became a child again.
and when i was done, he actually offered me his shirt to wipe off my feet and kindly walked me out.
he told me that he was abused above ground and was once in riker's island, and at last he found peace and quiet in that space.
when i was there three years ago, the windows were broken and the walls were peeling, but everything was left there as it was.
there are more than 185 miles of tunnels, and only about a mile is open to the public as a museum.
so the bones were moved from the cemeteries into the quarries, making them into the catacombs.
it was built in the early 1500s.
and when the tides of waste matter come in it sounds as if a whole storm is approaching you.
but whenever i get a chance i still work on my series.
what i'm going to try and do in the next 15 minutes or so is tell you about an idea of how we're going to make matter come alive.
i love things that are alive.
and when i talk about darwinian evolution, i mean one thing and one thing only, and that is survival of the fittest.
so when i thought about it, then suddenly i realized that biology gave us the answer.
and this is really the question.
if we can make matter alive, would we have a matterhazard?
if your pen could replicate, that would be a bit of a problem.
and we also have to be aware of the issues.
and you have all these pathways going on at the same time.
and i think that is where we have to start in terms of thinking about building from our ideas in life.
well, i like think of it as a flame in a bottle.
so before we can really start to make life, we have to really think about where it came from.
we then got to the last ancestor.
and this one happens to be a good source of all 20 amino acids.
this is how i remember what i need as a chemist.
and the way to test it in the laboratory is to make it minimal.
but we need to make some containers.
and just a few months ago in my lab, we were able to take these very same molecules and make cells with them.
is there some driving force through evolution that allows matter to compete?
so imagine we make a little cell.
we want to put it out in the environment, and we want it to be powered by the sun.
what we do is we evolve it in a box with a light on.
and what does that mean in a universe where we are right now the highest form of stuff?
and we're really becoming very close to understanding the key steps that makes dead stuff come alive.
so what will that tell us about the origin of life and the meaning of life?
we really struggle to do this.
so the other thing that if we were able to create life that's not based on carbon, maybe we can tell nasa what really to look for.
i'm going to try and explain why it is that perhaps we don't understand as much as we think we do.
i think we agree on that.
the third question is, why is it hotter in summer than in winter?
i think we can probably agree that it is hotter in summer than in winter, but why?
would you be able to do that?
i passed them really well, but i still came out of school thinking that that stuff came out of the ground.
now, the reason this matters is we pay lots and lots of money for teaching people -- we might as well get it right.
and there are also some societal reasons why we might want people to understand what it is that's happening in photosynthesis.
i promise you that most of you will have got that.
other ones are kind of going like this.
poor teaching actually does more harm than good.
they pat themselves on the back.
so the most important thing is to get people to articulate their models.
and you've all got an idea in your head of the answer.
we are here today because [the] united nations have defined goals for the progress of countries.
and the reason i really like these goals is that there are eight of them.
and by specifying eight different goals, the united nations has said that there are so many things needed to change in a country in order to get the good life for people.
that's what makes the difference between political talking like this and really going for the important thing, a better life for people.
come with me to the wonderful world of statistics.
i bring you to the webpage, childmortality.org, where you can take deaths in children below five years of age for all countries -- it's done by u.n.
is it so that in kenya, there are doctors and other specialists who write the death certificate at the death of the child and it's sent to the statistical office?
how many children did you have?
and then this is done in a representative sample of thousands of women in the country and put together in what used to be called a demographic health survey report.
and when the experts in the u.n.
but watch out -- they continue the line beyond the last point out into nothing.
i would say, at least do this -- 10 years is enough to follow the trend.
had i been in the ministry of health in kenya, i may have joined these two points.
so what i'm telling you is that we know the child mortality.
it's coming into some tricky things then when we are measuring mdgs.
we in public health, we hate child death, so we want less and less and less of child deaths.
so is this fair now to measure this over 19 years?
i have just divided it into two periods.
and look here when i take you into my bubble graphs.
and what has happened over the years since then?
these were bad years, and people got fed up with sweden.
my ancestors moved to the united states.
and eventually, soon they started to get better and better here.
and the good thing is that ghana today is going with the same rate as egypt did at its fastest.
we have a severe problem in countries which are at a standstill.
i just want not to have any room for doubt -- you have to see that for yourself.
and we have to realize that we are all going to into this, down to here.
it's fully possible to get child mortality down in all of these countries and to get them down in the corner where we all would like to live together.
all the time we are trying to get value for money.
what are the challenges in getting value for money as well as value for many?
well, you are to ride a bicycle, carrying your own weight and also some other weight, so that you can earn the bread for the day.
an innovator is one who does not know it cannot be done.
they believe that things can be done.
so that is the house of tata.
and it was that compassion which bothered them, because when he saw -- in fact, he told me about eight or nine years ago how he was driving his own car -- he drives his own car by the way -- and he saw in the rain, a family like the one that i showed to you getting drenched with an infant.
of course, as soon as you say something like this people say it is impossible, and that's what was said by suzuki.
let me tell you a bit about it.
and at a point in time, he got so engrossed in the whole challenge, that he himself became a member of the team.
i still am told about this story of that single wiper design in which he participated.
but who was the team leader?
all ideas on board were welcome.
it was an open innovation, ideas from all over were welcome.
and what happened was that -- more from less -- you can see how much more for how much less.
this is why you started actually a new paradigm shift, where the same people who could not dream of sitting in a car, who were carrying their entire family in a scooter, started dreaming of being in a car.
and those dreams are getting fulfilled.
this is a photograph of a house and a driver and a car near my own home.
he has bought his own nano.
i remember talking about this for the first time in australia, about one and a half years ago, when their academy honored me with a fellowship.
and of course, these feet are so designed that they can walk only on such perfect pavement or roads.
and they climb up for their work.
and i like to show how it looks and how it works.
we used to have 40, now they have come down to 30.
so actually we are getting less from more for less and less people.
let us just take an example.
let's start in the spirit of more from less and more for more and start putting some targets.
and that is how this difference has come.
so the message he was giving us was you must get more from less and less and less so that you can share it for more and more people, not only the current generation, but the future generations.
so he was giving you the message that you must have it for more and more people, not just a few people.
and mind you, it is not getting just a little more for just a little less.
the ideas have to be such that you think in completely different terms.
and i would also add, it is not only getting more from less for more by more and more people, the whole world working for it.
i was very touched when i saw a breakthrough the other day.
and that is why the message is that of gandhian engineering.
i was also afraid of those 18 minutes.
now, when you were a young boy in this school, what were your thoughts, like what did you think you could become?
was there a vision you had?
one day he took us out into the sun and tried to show us how to find the focal length of a convex lens.
the piece of paper was there.
he moved it up and down.
and then you extract them out of the ground, and sell them on the open marketplace.
what happens when you design a service that is so appropriate for a particular person -- that's exactly what they need at this moment in time?
and the question isn't really so much a question as an accusation.
and the dutch, when they usually put it, it always starts with the same two words.
you know the words i mean?
because the experience happens inside of us.
it's the only place you ever go for a walk in the woods and all the trees are lined up in rows.
there will always be companies around to supply the fake, because there will always be desire for the fake.
but is it really true to itself?
is it really in the city?
so she calls it a real fake.
when you are there you are just immersed in this wonderful environment.
right, the key of being true to yourself is knowing who you are as a business.
because it is no longer true to itself.
so, the number one thing to do when it comes to being what you say you are, is to provide places for people to experience who you are.
for people to experience who you are.
and think about the economic value they have provided by that experience.
one of the fascinating things about what we were actually working on is that we were seeing, using new kinds of scanning technologies, things that had just never been seen before -- i mean, not only in disease management, but also things that allowed us to see things about the body that just made you marvel.
i remember one of the first times we were looking at collagen.
because we kept on seeing this over and over and over again in different parts of the body.
45 days embryo's heart is beating twice as fast as the mother's.
even though i am a mathematician, i look at this with marvel of how do these instruction sets not make these mistakes as they build what is us?
then you start to take a look at adult life.
a few words about how i got started, and it has a lot to do with happiness, actually.
and, kind of as a way of surviving, i would go into my own very personal space, and i would make things.
and the ideas are very disparate.
and this really came about from having many different kinds of interests.
i was also very interested in perhaps going into surgery and becoming a surgeon, because it meant working with my hands in a very focused, intense way.
the next piece that is going to come up is an example of a kind of machine that is fairly complex.
and then it was a matter of starting from one point and sort of building to that final point.
i imagine what can be said with them.
this whole thing is about four feet wide, and the chair itself is only about a few inches.
there are 12 pairs of 50:1 reductions, so that means that the final speed of that gear on the end is so slow that it would take two trillion years to turn once.
because it could run all the time.
it completely changed what i could do.
it would be -- whatever came across the finish line first would be the winner.
but then in the end, what i decided was every time you finish writing the word, i would stop and i would give the card to somebody on the side of the road.
so i would never win the race because i'm always stopping.
but i had a lot of fun.
this is a piece that, for me, is in some ways the most complete kind of piece.
because when i was a kid, i also played a lot of guitar.
and that leads me to the thought that all of these pieces start off in my own mind, in my heart, and i do my best at finding ways to express them with materials, and it always feels really crude.
the object itself just means nothing.
i have a very difficult task.
but i'll try to convince you that spectroscopy is actually something which can change this world.
i spent about eight months working on these profiles.
because they thought that if you are having a telescope, you are an astronomer so what you are doing is actually looking in a telescope.
and you might have seen the planet going into a star.
what i see is this one."
i bet that there were very few people who really understood what i'm talking about.
because they actually said that you can get any color you like in a spectrum.
and all you need is time and money to make your spectrograph.
and we have a cool atmosphere.
cool in my terms is three or four or five thousand degrees.
and now this is a work in progress.
i knew that there is nothing like that observed in the galaxy.
they actually said that one of the stars you see in the spectra is an alien.
it comes from a different galaxy.
and sometimes they just capture stars.
we were very surprised to discover a super flare, a flare which is thousands of millions of times more powerful than those we see in the sun.
and later we went to study the spectral stars to see is there anything strange with these objects.
and we found that everything is normal.
these stars are normal like the sun.
i don't really want you to try to understand what is here.
so which means that it's really impossible to find an object where you find about 10 times more sulfur than silicon, five times more calcium than oxygen.
this can be done with the future spectrographs.
this is the sound of an alpha cen.
because can you imagine everything boiling?
then you have to convince your colleagues.
but if you want to know about a life on extrasolar planets, you have to do this job.
i think the most promising way is to go for biomarkers.
now imagine doing this test for other planets.
so this is the power of spectroscopy.
there can be different ways doing this.
and we are doing this job since 2000 and it's a very heavy project.
we have been working very hard.
and i hope in the near future we can confirm this.
i think it will not come from ufos.
if we discover a spectrum like this we can be sure that there is life on that planet.
it will take about five years.
so i think what i'll do is just call you a storyteller."
i tried to call deep on my courage.
and this is where my story starts.
so i was very excited about this.
but i want to be able to make them not messy.
i want to hack into these things i know are important and lay the code out for everyone to see.
so where i started was with connection.
and all you can think about is that opportunity for growth, right?
and when you ask people about connection, the stories they told me were about disconnection.
and it turned out to be shame.
and shame is really easily understood as the fear of disconnection: is there something about me that, if other people know it or see it, that i won't be worthy of connection?
no one wants to talk about it, and the less you talk about it the more you have it.
and you know how i feel about vulnerability.
and so i thought, this is my chance to beat it back with my measuring stick.
but here's what i can tell you that it boils down to -- and this may be one of the most important things that i've ever learned in the decade of doing this research.
there was only one variable that separated the people who have a strong sense of love and belonging and the people who really struggle for it.
and that was, the people who have a strong sense of love and belonging believe they're worthy of love and belonging.
so what i did is i took all of the interviews where i saw worthiness, where i saw people living that way, and just looked at those.
what do these people have in common?
and the first words that came to my mind were whole-hearted.
so i wrote at the top of the manila folder, and i started looking at the data.
what they had in common was a sense of courage.
and i want to separate courage and bravery for you for a minute.
and the last was they had connection, and -- this was the hard part -- as a result of authenticity, they were willing to let go of who they thought they should be in order to be who they were, which you have to absolutely do that for connection.
they just talked about it being necessary.
and now my mission to control and predict had turned up the answer that the way to live is with vulnerability and to stop controlling and predicting.
and i had to put my data away and go find a therapist.
let me tell you something: you know who you are when you call your friends and say, "i think i need to see somebody.
and i think i have a problem, and i need some help."
and it took about a year.
why do we struggle with it so much?
am i alone in struggling with vulnerability?
so this is what i learned.
and one of the ways we deal with it is we numb vulnerability.
and it becomes this dangerous cycle.
one of the things that i think we need to think about is why and how we numb.
because what we do is we take fat from our butts and put it in our cheeks.
let me tell you what we think about children.
we do that in our personal lives.
can i believe in this this passionately?
i just put it up because that little blue dot is the sensor.
this is him on the screen.
and even though steven passed away three years ago we had an amazing journey as a family.
and i want to talk today about one of the things that we decided to do, which was to think about a new way of approaching healthcare.
i want to talk about it in the context of a story.
this is the story of my brother.
and i want to go beyond the story, and go to something more.
is what we are here to do in medicine, is what everyone should do.
here he is in the pool.
and this is the insight, the thing that we are excited about, because we have gone away from the community that we are, the fact that we really do love each other and want to care for each other.
we need to give to others to be successful.
there are so many other people sharing their stories.
so, this is what it looks like when you go to the website.
those are things that are different for each m.s.
each of them can have a different characteristic.
but he is working to keep his cd4 count high and his viral level low so he can make his life better.
and i want to talk to the ones of those that have been doing it for more than two years.
wouldn't it be great if the technology we used to take care of ourselves was as good as the technology we use to make money?
you can look at the interaction between how i treat my als.
i want to solve a problem.
this is all about patient health care, there was no doctors on our network.
you don't want to be on the red line, you want to be on the blue line.
because the blue line is a better line.
the red line is way downhill, the blue line is a good line.
can you help us answer this question?
then we can do something harder."
can we find out what's going to happen to you, so that you can maybe change it?"
this is a real app by the way.
and we bring their histories into it.
and it works almost every time.
but almost all the time it works.
but we could see whether it was going to work for humberto.
but here is the answer of the mean of the patients that actually decided to take lithium.
can we do the even harder thing?
can we go to the patients that actually decided to stay on lithium, because they were so convinced they were getting better?
even the ones that believed they were getting better matched the controls exactly.
i never really knew whether it worked.
and there are these guys who used to model the future of interest rates, and all that kind of stuff.
and some of them were available.
and he sent me this two days ago.
we have to go talk to him.
my brother went straight down the line.
it only works about 12 months.
first time we ever tried it.
we'll try to get it better later but 12 months so far.
and her husband had come in and entered her last functional scores, because he knew how much she cared.
i'd like to show it in real time, now, and i want to do that for all of the diseases that we can do that for.
what would happen if we could generate power from our windowpanes?
something always seems to stop us.
and yet i think it's this perspective of us as humans to look at our world through the lens of normal is one of the forces that stops us developing real solutions.
it was the sequencing for the first time of the human genome.
and i wondered, what if the answer to some of our biggest problems could be found in the smallest of places, where the difference between what is valuable and what is worthless is merely the addition or subtraction of a few atoms?
think of the space that we spend most of our time.
we like the light that comes into the room, but in the middle of summer, all that heat is coming into the room that we're trying to keep cool.
wouldn't it be really great if the window could flick back the heat into the room if we needed it or flick it away before it came in?
one of the things about working at the nanoscale is things look and act very differently.
the total width of it is 600 times smaller than the width of a decimal place.
the power plant of tomorrow is no power plant.
and what they built was ebox.
when we run out of water, as we are in some parts of the world and soon to be in other parts of the world, we're going to have to get this from the sea, and that's going to require us to build desalination plants.
but in a world where energy is freed and transmittable easily and cheaply, we can take any water wherever we are and turn it into whatever we need.
we can do better than this.
we should do better than this.
this is why we have to solve our problems, and i know the answer as to how is to be able to get exquisite control over a building block of nature, the stuff of life: the simple electron.
this is slave labor to my own project.
we bury them in the ground.
so what do we need if we want to do this at the human scale?
and we built 500 of these glass beakers.
and we gave them away to all the tedsters.
you shake it hard and it breaks apart.
we even demonstrated that we can do this at a much larger scale.
a single strand dipped in water that completely self-folds on its own into the letters m i t.
so i would like to invite you from whatever industry you're from to join us in reinventing and reimagining the world, how things come together from the nanoscale to the human scale, so that we can go from a world like this to a world that's more like this.
we believe that we should work to be happy, but could that be backwards?
when i was seven years old and my sister was just five years old, we were playing on top of a bunk bed.
i was two years older than my sister at the time -- i mean, i'm two years older than her now -- but at the time it meant she had to do everything that i wanted to do, and i wanted to play war.
and on one side of the bunk bed, i had put out all of my g.i.
somehow, without any help or push from her older brother at all, suddenly amy disappeared off of the top of the bunk bed and landed with this crash on the floor.
now i nervously peered over the side of the bed to see what had befallen my fallen sister and saw that she had landed painfully on her hands and knees on all fours on the ground.
i was nervous because my parents had charged me with making sure that my sister and i played as safely and as quietly as possible.
did you see how you landed?
now that was cheating, because there was nothing in the world my sister would want more than not to be amy the hurt five year-old little sister, but amy the special unicorn.
what we had stumbled across is something called positive psychology, which is the reason that i'm here today and the reason that i wake up every morning.
when i first started talking about this research outside of academia, out with companies and schools, the very first thing they said to never do is to start your talk with a graph.
the very first thing i want to do is start my talk with a graph.
if i asked a question like, "how fast can a child learn how to read in a classroom?"
we're hoping for both because our business model is, if you come into a therapy session with one problem, we want to make sure you leave knowing you have 10, so you keep coming back over and over again.
and if we can change the lens, not only can we change your happiness, we can change every single educational and business outcome at the same time.
i was an officer of harvard to counsel students through the difficult four years.
and if we change it, if we change our formula for happiness and success, what we can do is change the way that we can then affect reality.
what we need to be able to do is to reverse this formula so we can start to see what our brains are actually capable of.
not only does it make you happier, it turns on all of the learning centers in your brain allowing you to adapt to the world in a different way.
we've found that there are ways that you can train your brain to be able to become more positive.
this is a different kind of boy and a different kind of girl.
for every 100 girls with a learning disability, there are 276 boys.
now there is another side to this.
nothing about that prevents us from paying attention to the literacy needs of our boys between ages three and 13.
they've done a lot of good for girls in these situations, and we ought to be thinking about how we can make that happen for boys too in their younger years.
they were turned off a long time before they got here.
so let's talk about why they got turned off when they were between the ages of three and 13.
there are three reasons that i believe that boys are out of sync with the culture of schools today.
what is it that we're afraid that this young man is going to do with this gun?
"now i have to write what she tells me to write."
what do you want to write about?"
i want to write about leveling-up.
i want to write about a tornado that comes into our house and blows all the windows out and ruins all the furniture and kills everybody."
this is a place for girls.
so that may be a very direct way that we see it happen.
the answer to that question changes depending on who's sitting around that table.
are there men around that table?
the reason that this is a problem is because the message that boys are getting is "you need to do what the teacher asks you to do all the time."
and so this is a very serious problem.
we want our babies to read when they are six months old.
we want to live in lake wobegon where every child is above average, but what this does to our children is really not healthy.
we need to meet them where they are.
we need to put ourselves into boy culture.
most of the educational games that are out there today are really flashcards.
we need to talk to teachers and parents and school board members and politicians.
we need to make sure that people see that we need more men in the classroom.
we have to change the culture and the feelings that politicians and school board members and parents have about the way we accept and what we accept in our schools today.
but if it were your culture, think of how that might feel.
they are sure that parents and administrators will never accept anything.
so we really need to think about looking at teacher attitudes and finding ways to change the attitudes so that teachers are much more open and accepting of boy cultures in their classrooms.
who of you grew up in a family business, suffered the torture?
and i was really good at school.
and this to me was an important message from rand.
it took a month to make this part.
and when i built this computer, i had a moment of -- what is it called?
and also, one thing i realized is that i like to make things.
and so i never developed the ability to have a staff.
how do you take that time you have left and go after it?
and so, i began to think more carefully about the computer.
this is all at the same time.
and so it keeps thinking out loud of its own abstraction.
and at this point my wife kind of got worried about me, so i stopped doing blue tape and began to think, well, what else is there in life?
i began to make led sculptures that would live inside little boxes out of mdf.
this is a series of light boxes i made for a show in italy.
so anyways, there are all these things you can do, but the thing i love the most is to experience, taste the world.
the world is just so tasty.
this i found, where nature had made a picture for me.
and i also discovered how .
and i went after it with passion.
and so i realized it was o.k.
what is it about flying cars?
so instead of trying to make a car that can fly, we decided to try to make a plane that could drive.
and we were all very flattered to see that image become a symbol of accomplishing something that people had thought was impossible really the world over.
now you may have seen in the news recently, they came through with us at the end of last month with a few special exemptions that will allow the transition to be sold in the same category as suvs and light trucks.
you can see there the wings folded up just along the side of the plane.
and you're all thinking what your neighbors would think of seeing that.
just fold up the wings and keep going.
i hope you'll each take a moment to think about how you could use something like this to give yourself more access to your own world, and to make your own travel more convenient and more fun.
thank you for giving me the opportunity to share it with you.
this is my first time at ted.
if you think about it, if you want to live in a world in the future where there are fewer material goods, you basically have two choices.
what on earth is wrong with placebos?
they cost very little to develop.
the point is that education doesn't actually work by teaching you things.
and he planted it in a royal potato patch, with guards who had instructions to guard over it, night and day, but with secret instructions not to guard it very well.
but not a patch on ataturk."
but that would have ended up with a lot of awful kickback and a hell of a lot of resistance.
but the first thing is that all value is subjective.
you start with 12 and they take them away.
the wealthy prussians, to help in the war against the french, were encouraged to give in all their jewelry.
and it was replaced with replica jewelry made of cast iron.
it was made of cast iron.
it said that your family had made a great sacrifice in the past.
there is a basic view that real value involves making things, involves labor.
and that what we add on top is kind of false.
this is actually called a mash-up, where you take content that someone else has produced and you do something new with it.
in the world of food we call it cooking.
this is food 2.0, which is food you produce for the purpose of sharing it with other people.
we invented the whole lot of them.
i only learned this the other day.
but a six is very different from a nine.
so drink your wine blind in the future.
because they help people share news.
the second one is the second g.k.
and it gives us a new way of thinking about not only what's going on on our planet, but what might be going on elsewhere in the cosmos.
and if the very few that survive pass onto their offspring whatever it was that helped them survive, then those offspring must be better adapted to the circumstances in which all this happened than their parents were.
this is what makes it so amazing.
he wanted a name for the new replicator.
there are plenty more in the shops.
this has spread all over the world.
other people are just lazy and make mistakes.
language must have been useful for the genes.
our children are growing up very quickly learning to read, learning to use machinery.
now, what about what else is going on out there in the universe?
is there anyone else out there?
people have been asking this question for a long time.
just start with the number of planets there are in our galaxy.
take the first step, as soon as life appeared on this earth.
how many mothers do we have here?
you know all about big brains.
what about all those other species?
what does it mean to pull through?
and why would they do that?
they could carry on without us.
but the damage that is already being done to the planet is showing us how dangerous the third point is, that third danger point, getting a third replicator.
and will we get through this third danger point, like we got through the second and like we got through the first?
it was 25 minutes of absolute terror that thousands of people across the u.s.
i was afraid of a tsunami; what i didn't realize was there was a greater terror in haiti, and that was building collapse.
we have all heard about the tremendous human loss in the earthquake in haiti, but we haven't heard enough about why all those lives were lost.
this is the ministry of justice.
and we know how to build properly.
it won't cost us any more to do it the right way."
and every building that they build going forward will be safe.
now there are many groups doing this.
for all the disaster, there is an opportunity here to build better houses for the next generation, so that when the next earthquake hits, it is a disaster -- but not a tragedy.
i want to talk to you today a little bit about predictable irrationality.
and my interest in irrational behavior started many years ago in the hospital.
the nurses in my department thought that the right approach was the ripping one, so they would grab hold and they would rip, and they would grab hold and they would rip.
and because i had 70 percent of my body burned, it would take about an hour.
why don't we take it a little longer -- maybe two hours instead of an hour -- and have less of this intensity?"
they told me that they had the right model of the patient -- that they knew what was the right thing to do to minimize my pain -- and they also told me that the word patient doesn't mean to make suggestions or to interfere or ...
and one of the most interesting lessons i learned was that there is an experimental method that if you have a question you can create a replica of this question in some abstract way, and you can try to examine this question, maybe learn something about the world.
i was still interested in this question of how do you take bandages off burn patients.
and i would bring people to the lab and i would put their finger in it, and i would crunch it a little bit.
i kept on doing this for a while.
but at the end of this process, what i learned was that the nurses were wrong.
it turns out it would have been better to start with my face, which was much more painful, and move toward my legs, giving me a trend of improvement over time -- that would have been also less painful.
and it also turns out that it would have been good to give me breaks in the middle to kind of recuperate from the pain.
all of these would have been great things to do, and my nurses had no idea.
and from that point on i started thinking, are the nurses the only people in the world who get things wrong in this particular decision, or is it a more general case?
and i want to give you one example of one of these irrationalities, and i want to talk to you about cheating.
is it the case that there was kind of a few apples who are capable of doing these things, or are we talking a more endemic situation, that many people are actually capable of behaving this way?
other people i would tempt to cheat.
i would pass their sheet of paper.
put the little pieces in your pocket or in your backpack, and tell me how many questions you got correctly."
instead, what we saw is a lot of people who cheat a little bit.
how much do i stand to gain from cheating?
and how much punishment would i get if i get caught?
you would expect that as the amount of money on the table increases, people would cheat more, but in fact it wasn't the case.
we got a lot of people cheating by stealing by a little bit.
some people shredded everything, went out of the room, and paid themselves from the bowl of money that had over 100 dollars.
and we thought maybe what is happening is that there are two forces.
at one hand, we all want to look at ourselves in the mirror and feel good about ourselves, so we don't want to cheat.
on the other hand, we can cheat a little bit, and still feel good about ourselves.
a third of the people we passed the sheet, they gave it back to us.
we did not pay them with dollars; we paid them with something else.
in fact, every day when we open the news we see examples of people cheating.
we got a big group of students to be in the experiment, and we prepaid them.
so everybody got an envelope with all the money for the experiment, and we told them that at the end, we asked them to pay us back the money they didn't make.
what would happen to the other people in the group?
they cheat just by a little bit.
would they not be able to see it this way?
what happens when you do other things, like you remove things from money?
i think all of those forces worked in a very bad way in the stock market.
and the difficulty of testing our intuition was the big lesson i learned when i went back to the nurses to talk to them.
so i went back to talk to them and tell them what i found out about removing bandages.
and she said maybe part of the reason was it was difficult for her.
and just think about how better my life would have been if these nurses would have been willing to check their intuition, and how everything would have been better if we just start doing more systematic experimentation of our intuitions.
my mom taught me to dance when i was five, and my dad taught me to play fiddle when i was nine.
there are four girls a little bit older than me.
we grew up without a television.
people find that strange, but i think it was a great blessing for us.
we had a television for a few years, but of course we wasted so much time and the work wasn't getting done, so out went the television.
we grew up playing a bunch of, we played by ear and i think that's important for us because we were not really exposed to a lot of different styles of music.
then  will i keep going?
i starts out with a slow air.
it became the only piano in the region, and mom said she could basically play as soon as the piano arrived, she could play it because she had learned all these rhythms.
it had gone through, like, five or six families, and it was just a big thing for us, and we found actually an old picture of somebody and their family years ago.
he never went back to school.
such is the power of self-study.
they were too busy building a family and a country.
and this is the great team that helped us make it happen.
and from day one, noam and i decided to put all these building blocks freely available in open source on the web.
and in short order, thousands of people were building our machine.
but given what i now feel capable of doing, i would certainly do it again.
and all this is something that a very young child can pick up using such mobile apps.
it basically means to be human and to do the right thing.
the most important thing is to be a mensch."
it really wasn't until i was invited to the homes of people that i started to understand the human toll of the epidemic.
he has been orphaned, as both of his parents died of aids, and his grandmother took care of him until he too died of aids.
he liked to sit on her lap because he said that it was painful for him to lie in his own bed.
when she got up to make tea, she placed him in my own lap and i had never felt a child that was that emaciated.
before i left, i actually asked him if i could get him something.
i thought he would ask for a toy, or candy, and he asked me for slippers, because he said that his feet were cold.
and i was last week walking on lafayette street in manhattan and got a call from a woman who i didn't know, but she called to tell me that joyce had passed away at the age of 23.
so a few of the stories.
with every picture, there are individuals who have full lives and stories that deserve to be told.
so i quit my job and decided that that's the subject that i wanted to tackle.
and i first actually went to botswana, where i spent a month -- this is in december 2000 -- then went to zimbabwe for a month and a half, and then went back again this march 2002 for another month and a half in zimbabwe.
and once it was sort of explained to me how fast we were using up the world's resources, i got very upset, about as upset as i did when i realized that the earth will only last about five billion years before it's swallowed by the sun.
but we have a lot of knowledge to gain before we can make solar the base load energy supply for the world.
our government is going to put in six new nuclear power stations.
because they know that that is one sure way to do carbon-free energy.
of course there is always a catch in these cases.
and sorry about that, but this is what turns me on.
and you want to go towards iron if you want to get energy.
and you push them together and they repel.
but when you get them close enough, something called the strong force starts to act and pulls them together.
you get them closer and closer and closer and then at some point the strong force grips them together.
you have to make it from something else.
and you make if from lithium.
and then we get to uranium.
this is a bit shocking, because in fact our government is relying on that for us to meet kyoto, and do all those kind of things.
we make estimates of what we think it would cost to actually make a fusion power plant.
it gets very expensive to do this research.
you have to do it in a very big device.
seven nations are involved in building this.
we have to get to this.
we have to get to a power plant.
and i'd really like it to happen a lot faster than it is.
but at the moment, all we can imagine is sometime in the 2030s.
we're going to have a problem with power in the next five years in this country.
i wish we had more money, i wish we had more resources.
a few years ago, my eyes were opened to the dark side of the construction industry.
there is no way back home.
and that as we worry about our next job in the office, the next design that we can get, to keep our workers.
what is real is separateness, and at some point in early babyhood, the idea of self starts to form.
is it who we really are?
so this whole interaction with self and identity was a very difficult one for me growing up.
the self that i attempted to take out into the world was rejected over and over again.
but in retrospect, the destruction of my self was so repetitive that i started to see a pattern.
and how many times would my self have to die before i realized that it was never alive in the first place?
i grew up on the coast of england in the '70s.
even the idea of us as a family was challenging to most people.
and i was a really good dancer.
i can hardly find the words to describe the peace i felt when i was acting.
because we all stem from africa.
and race is an illegitimate concept which our selves have created based on fear and ignorance.
my desire to disappear was still very powerful.
i still believed my self was all i was.
for a start, we can think about all the times when we do lose ourselves.
and i honestly believe the key to my success as an actor and my progress as a person has been the very lack of self that used to make me feel so anxious and insecure.
i thought i lacked substance, and the fact that i could feel others' meant that i had nothing of myself to feel.
the thing that was a source of shame was actually a source of enlightenment.
and when i realized and really understood that my self is a projection and that it has a function, a funny thing happened.
i stopped giving it so much authority.
and over time and with practice, i've tried to live more and more from my essence.
let's live with each other and take it a breath at a time.
we knew it from the day we were born.
and i was there looking at the larger scale of buildings and finding that the buildings that were around me and that were being designed and that were there in the publications i was seeing felt soulless and cold.
the first building i built was 20 years ago.
i spent a lot of time counting beads and things like that.
and this is a window display.
i was going to show four main projects.
i think we all kind of stand and watch.
and then we looked at these kinds of bridges and just couldn't help feeling that it was a beautiful thing that had broken.
so we liked the idea that the two farthest bits of it would end up kissing each other.
we actually had to halve its speed, because everyone was too scared when we first did it.
in the news, the subject of where our future water is going to come from and where our power is going to come from is in all the papers all the time.
and we used to be quite proud of the way we generated power.
it has a child running through a field, or something like that.
and so we spent time traveling with them and learning about all the different elements, and finding that there were plenty of inefficiencies that weren't being capitalized on.
and there are 2,000 new homes being built next to this power station.
and we should be proud of where our power is coming from, rather than something we are necessarily ashamed of.
so we were looking at how we could make a power station, that, instead of keeping people out and having a big fence around the outside, could be a place that pulls you in.
so it felt that what we could try to do is make a power park and actually bring the whole area in, and using the spare soil that's there on the site, we could make a power station that was silent as well.
the finished project is meant to be more than just a power station.
so people can come and really experience this and also look out all around the area, and use that height that we have to have for its function.
we won the competition, and it was painful to get there.
so our sense was we had to do one thing, and only one thing, instead of trying to have everything.
so we suddenly realized that there was this thing.
but you just have to go to a garden center, and they're in little paper packets.
so we realized we had to make a project that would be seeds, some kind of seed cathedral.
we didn't want to make a separate building and have separate content.
so we were trying to think, how could we make a whole thing emanate.
and so there was one particular toy that gave us a clue.
so the idea was to take these 66,000 seeds that they agreed to give us, and to take each seed and trap it in this precious optical hair and grow that through this box, very simple box element, and make it a building that could move in the wind.
so the whole thing can gently move when the wind blows.
and so the rest of the site was a public space.
and with a million people there a day, it just felt like offering some public space.
a key thing was how people would interact.
i mean, in a way it was the most serious thing you could possible do at the expo.
and i just wanted to show you.
and there was a lot of terror.
this is the head of u.k.
so there was an incentive for the developer to really try to think about what would be better for the city.
the lowest value is actually the bottom part of a tower like this.
so if we could chop that away and give the building a small bottom, we could take that bit and put it at the top where the greater commercial value is for a property developer.
since we have an extra minute here, i thought perhaps you could tell us a little bit about these seeds, which maybe came from the shaved bit of the building.
th: these are a few of the tests we did when we were building the structure.
and so the daylight was just coming -- it was caught on the outside of the box and was coming down to illuminate each seed.
you can see my fellow riders at the end of the picture, looking at me with some concern.
and here is another picture of them.
this story began four years ago.
so on one of these rides, i talked my way into the compound and went to see the warden.
i told the warden that i wanted to start a mountain biking club in this place and that basically i wanted to take the kids from here to there.
and i told him, "let's find a way in which i'll be able to take out 10 kids once a week to ride with in the summer in the country."
they are supposed to be locked up.
so we had a lot of this going on.
i found out that they had a very hard time dealing with frustration and difficulties -- not because they were physically unfit.
but that's one reason why they ended up where they were.
and i became increasingly more and more agitated, because i was there not only to be with them, but also to ride and create a team and i didn't know what to do.
so he crashes down, and he gets slightly injured, but this does not prevent him from jumping up and then starting to jump up and down on his bike and curse violently.
then he throws his helmet in the air.
and then he runs to the nearest tree and starts to break branches and throw rocks and curse like i've never heard.
and at some point i found out, when a kid like this gets into a fit, the best thing that you can possibly do is stay as close as possible to this kid, which is difficult, because what you really want to do is go away.
so what you have to do is stay close and try to reach in and pet his shoulder or give him a piece of chocolate.
because you have to understand that on these rides we are constantly hungry -- and after the rides also.
and he spent the last 10 years of his life in two places only, the slums and the state prison, where he spent the last two years before he ended up sitting on this rock there.
i want to say a few words about vision.
and it took me exactly two months of complete frustration to realize that this vision was misplaced, and that there was another vision supremely more important and more readily available.
all you have to do is play with it, change it a little bit, and come up with something that does help, that does work.
before each ride we sit together with the kids, and we give them one word to think about during the ride.
you have to focus their attention on something because so many things happen.
i tell kids when they struggle through some uphill and feel like they cannot take it anymore, it really helps to ignore the immediate obstacles and raise your head and look around and see how the vista around you grows.
now, let me give you an example of how it works.
and you look down at yokneam; everything is so small and tiny.
and so we talked about these special words that we teach them.
this was the first place where we got some water and supplies."
that's where joshua descended and crossed the jordan and led the people of israel into the land of canaan 3,000 years ago in this final leg of the journey from africa.
and i feel blessed and fortunate that 15 years ago i had the courage to resign my tenured position at nyu and return to my home country where i can do these incredible rides with this group of troubled kids coming from ethiopia and morocco and russia.
a year ago, i spoke to you about a book that i was just in the process of completing, that has come out in the interim, and i would like to talk to you today about some of the controversies that that book inspired.
there are a number of reasons to doubt that the human mind is a blank slate, and some of them just come from common sense.
and anyone who's ever been in a heterosexual relationship knows that the minds of men and the minds of women are not indistinguishable.
well, this is what happens when you pair people up at random.
let me start with the arts.
the only grain of truth to this complaint that the arts are in decline come from three spheres.
let me give just you an example to back up that last statement.
i feel like i could devote my life to figuring out what to play with my kids."
everything that happens to you in a given home over all of those years appears to leave no permanent stamp on your personality or intellect.
and that presents us with a choice.
and the job in question was sheep rancher.
i'm an apprentice, and i work with the people who actually do the jobs in question.
and my responsibilities are to simply try and keep up and give an honest account of what it's like to be these people, for one day in their life.
we go to craig and we check in to a hotel and i realize the next day that castration is going to be an absolute part of this work.
blood flow is slowly retarded; a week later the parts in question fall off.
so the next day i go out.
and i'm given a horse and we go get the lambs and we take them to a pen that we built, and we go about the business of animal husbandry.
i always watch the process done the first time before i try it.
and he kind of flicked it open in a way that caught the sun that was just coming over the rockies, it was very -- it was, it was impressive.
he goes to his box and he pulls out a bag of these little rubber bands.
how long does it take them to fall off?"
and i was just so blown away at how wrong i was, in that second.
and i was especially reminded of what an ridiculously short straw i had that day because now i had to do what albert had just done, and there are like 100 of these lambs in the pen, and suddenly this whole thing's starting to feel like a german porno, and i'm like ...
and i can't get this thought out of my head, and i can't get that vision out of my sight, so i did what i had to do.
i went in and i took them.
when you start to look for peripetia, you find it everywhere.
i mean, these are the people that i work with every single day.
people with dirty jobs are happier than you think.
and i see it over and over and over again.
so i started to wonder what would happen if we challenged some of these sacred cows.
he stepped back and he watched where everybody was going and he went the other way.
and i hear that story over and over.
what i mean to say is i value my safety on these crazy jobs as much as the people that i'm working with, but the ones who really get it done, they're not out there talking about safety first.
they know that other things come first -- the business of doing the work comes first, the business of getting it done.
my responsibility is not to get you home alive.
my responsibility is to get you home rich."
i could talk at length about the many little distinctions we made and the endless list of ways that i got it wrong.
you see him all the time.
how many people have their blackberries?
i would never suggest for a second that something bad has come out of the tech revolution.
and to me the most important thing to know and to really come face to face with, is that fact that i got it wrong about a lot of things, not just the testicles on my chin.
somebody needs to be out there talking about the forgotten benefits.
and i know the point of this conference is to celebrate things that are near and dear to us, but i also know that clean and dirty aren't opposites.
i didn't know which of these things was true, but i thought it was kind of interesting.
and i thought maybe i should meet a critic of psychiatry to get their view.
which is how i ended up having lunch with the scientologists.
do you want us to try and get you into broadmoor to meet tony?"
so i got the train to broadmoor.
and i got taken through gate after gate after gate after gate into the wellness center, which is where you get to meet the patients.
and a man was walking in.
and he had his arm outstretched like someone out of the apprentice.
he looked like a man who wanted to wear an outfit that would convince me that he was very sane.
i beat someone up when i was 17.
i told the psychiatrist that i wanted to watch women as they died because it would make me feel more normal."
so i tend to stay in my room a lot because i find them quite frightening.
and they take that as a sign of madness.
and we have determined that what he is is a psychopath."
so i gave it a try.
he was taking me through the garden.
and then we went into his kitchen.
can i go through them with you?"
but i did notice something happening to me the day i was with al dunlap.
whenever he said anything to me that was kind of normal -- like he said no to juvenile delinquency.
so whenever he said anything to me that just seemed kind of non-psychopathic, i thought to myself, well i'm not going to put that in my book.
and then i realized that becoming a psychopath spotter had turned me a little bit psychopathic.
we travel across the world with our notepads in our hands, and we wait for the gems.
so i went to his tribunal.
and for the last 20 months everything was fine.
he was living with a girl outside london.
i just want to thank you for everything you've done for me."
i don't want to suggest that they are a single thing that you can point to.
and i think a good way to prove this is simply to demonstrate to you what my thought process was when deciding what to put on the wall behind me when i spoke.
and the same problem with respect to islam.
other people would say it means something else.
you could begin with the one that we began with a couple of days ago, which was fear.
so fear is not a crazy response at all.
what do i have in mind?
it may be that there was a great war to be fought between west and east, and it was necessary on the axis of democracy against communism.
and it was necessary in some way for these to contradict each other, and as a consequence you have to make friends wherever you can get them.
and for the most part try to stop them from making this argument.
so had they contested a larger number of the seats, they would have done even better.
now what i want to suggest to you is that the reason for hope in this case is that we are on the edge of a real transformation in the muslim world.
now what would that look like?
you face the circumstances you have in front of you and you go forward.
and i think that we are capable of taking on that obligation, but only if we put what we can into it.
how does a job this big get done?
for as long as i can remember, i have felt a very deep connection to animals and to the ocean.
and when i first learned about endangered species, i was truly distressed to know that every day animals were being wiped off the face of this earth forever.
and i wanted to do something to help, but i always wondered, what could one person possibly do to make a difference?
and it would be 30 years, but i would eventually get the answer to that question.
and i want to tell you why i feel so strongly about this.
up to 1,000 people a day came to the rescue center, and eventually, over the course of this rescue, more than 12 and a half thousand volunteers came from all over the world to cape town to help save these birds.
and the amazing thing was that not one of them had to be there -- yet they were.
because we all knew that just six years earlier, half as many penguins had been oiled and rescued and only half of them had survived.
and there really were no good solutions.
so it had been a huge gamble, but it had paid off.
and so they know now that they can use this strategy in future oil spills.
so this alone was a huge victory.
something else learned during the apollo rescue was how to train the penguins to take fish freely from their hands, using these training boxes.
and it would take two people at least an hour just to clean one penguin.
and this brings me to my favorite story from the treasure rescue.
so he raced to the lab and made enough to clean the rest of the birds.
so i just think it is the coolest thing that a teenager invented a product that helped save the lives of thousands of animals.
well she could not be more wrong.
and i learned that one person can make a huge difference.
just look at that 17 year-old.
and truly, to be a part of something so much larger than yourself is the most rewarding experience you can possibly have.
so i'd like to leave you with one final thought and a challenge, if you will.
and these are two things that each one of us actually has the power to do something about.
humans have always been the greatest threat to penguins, but we are now their only hope.
and the answer would appear to be yes, and the language would appear to be food.
so, three and a half years ago, a few of us sat around a kitchen table and we just invented the whole thing.
we came up with a really simple game plan that we put to a public meeting.
we did not write a report.
i have never, ever experienced anything like that in my life.
they want positive actions they can engage in, and in their bones, they know it's time to take personal responsibility and invest in more kindness to each other and to the environment.
and there's been lots of other examples, like the corn that was in front of the police station, and the old people's home that we've planted it with food that they can pick and grow.
and for those people that don't want to do either of those things, maybe they can cook, so we pick them seasonally and then we go on the street, or in the pub, or in the church, or wherever people are living their lives.
it was really quite muddy, but in a truly incredible way, totally voluntary-led, we have turned that into a market garden training center, and that is polytunnels and raised beds and all the things you need to get the soil under your fingers and think maybe there's a job in this for me in the future.
and what we did was we put people on our egg map.
this is not a movement for those people that are going to sort themselves out anyway.
put that at the heart of your school culture, and you will create a different generation.
there are so many things you can do, but ultimately this is about something really simple.
and it's wonderful to be in the presence of an organization that is really making a difference in the world.
and i'm also rather surprised, because when i look back on my life the last thing i ever wanted to do was write, or be in any way involved in religion.
and for 13 years i kept clear of it.
but i got sent to jerusalem to make a film about early christianity.
and it has been the study of other religious traditions that brought me back to a sense of what religion can be, and actually enabled me to look at my own faith in a different light.
and i found some astonishing things in the course of my study that had never occurred to me.
indeed, some of the world traditions think very little of religious orthodoxy.
so if religion is not about believing things, what is it about?
you behave in a committed way, and then you begin to understand the truths of religion.
because in compassion, when we feel with the other, we dethrone ourselves from the center of our world and we put another person there.
a pagan came to him and offered to convert to judaism if the rabbi could recite the whole of jewish teaching while he stood on one leg.
but now look at our world.
and we are living in a world that is -- where religion has been hijacked.
we formed you, says the quran, into tribes and nations so that you may know one another.
as though that -- we call religious people often believers, as though that were the main thing that they do.
because the golden rule is difficult.
and especially the young people were coming.
what can we do to change things?"
and religion, with its wide following ... here in the united states, people may be being religious in a different way, as a report has just shown -- but they still want to be religious.
but people want to be religious, and religion should be made to be a force for harmony in the world, which it can and should be -- because of the golden rule.
we should not treat other nations as we would not wish to be treated ourselves.
and as i say, there is a hunger for change out there.
and everybody is shocked when the old man takes off his head covering and shows himself.
and the alliance has told me that they are very happy to work with it.
in this powerful short talk, he tells the story of an encounter with right and wrong that quickly gets personal.
"what are you going to teach me about right and wrong?
if i ever get out of here, there will always be a mark by my name.
what are you going to tell me about right and wrong?"
you think you know right and wrong?
then can you tell me what wrong is?
maybe one of us is wrong about the wrong.
i want to know what is wrong.
i want to know what i know."
socrates, a man wise enough to know that he knows nothing.
we know this because they did an experiment."
but i also don't understand how it does ruin the magic.
but if we want to look at the sky and see predictions, we still can.
and that is a wonderful thing there.
love does not die because of that thing.
and that is all of these different things -- the love for my child.
though i should say that my son is best and is better than your children.
and all of these things to me give such joy and excitement and wonder.
perhaps you've been at home for a week on your own.
you house is in a terrible state.
your partner is about to return.
now for some people, that seems to lead to an idea of nihilism.
i can make my own purpose.
you can make your own purpose.
what does anyone mean when they talk about real security?
i think that when that is the focus of your life, these are the things that happen.
you become part of an "us."
there are people not like you -- people who you now call enemies.
your days become devoted to protecting yourself.
it gets easier to hurt people because you do not feel what's inside them.
i loved when he was talking about this other world that's right next to this world.
there are thousands if not millions of them on the planet.
they have a fierceness and a freedom that i believe is the bedrock of a new paradigm.
i want to talk about a few of these people that i've met.
that will happen because women in cairo made a decision to stand up and put themselves on the line, and talk about the degree of violence that is happening in egypt, and were willing to be attacked and criticized.
and in this meeting -- it went on for weeks in the press, two weeks where there was huge discussion.
but the amazing news was that because they had stood up, these women, and because they had been willing to risk their security, it began a discussion that not only happened in uganda, but all of africa.
so she really struggled with this, what to do, because she was a senior and she was doing well in her school and she was threatened expulsion.
it's beginning to talk about sex, it's beginning to look at why it would be wrong for a young high school girl to talk about her vagina publicly or to say that she loved her vagina publicly.
she made a decision not to go and get a razor or a glass shard, but to devote her life to stopping that happening to other girls.
something happened when i began traveling in v-day, eight years ago.
freedom means i may not be identified as any one group, but that i can visit and find myself in every group.
i do not use them as weapons.
you spent eight years on this one.
if you think that the u.n.
what i believe is if we could figure out how to make women safe and honor women, it would be parallel or equal to honoring life itself.
i did that for two reasons.
you cannot turn them off with a switch.
now i was stupid, but not so stupid that i turned it down.
it is the story factory, one of the very best in the world.
we bring stories to the public.
the stories can be anything, and some of them are actually true.
but they all have one thing in common: they all need to look like something.
to give you a first impression of what you are about to get into.
and lo and behold, soon enough, i was able to put this theory to the test on two books that i was working on for knopf.
now the hepburn book was written in a very conversational style, it was like she was sitting across a table telling it all to you.
i had no idea what i was doing, i had no idea where i was going, but at some point, i stopped -- when to keep going would seem like i was going too far.
and what i ended up with was a graphic representation of us seeing this animal coming into being.
we all know it was an amazing movie, and it was so interesting to see it go out into the culture and become this phenomenon and to see all the different permutations of it.
but if you think about it, from my head to my hands to his leg.
and the reason he went is because he had a fear of his body image, and he wanted to explore what was underlying that.
usually on the first day of introduction to typography, you get the assignment of, select a word and make it look like what it says it is.
they all came in that way."
a book cover is a distillation.
this story was a real puzzle.
all right, so i got a collection of the paintings together and i looked at them and i deconstructed them and i put them back together.
but the real story starts when you wrap it around a book and put it on the shelf.
and now, we have to open it up to find out what's going to happen next.
do you know what john updike used to do the first thing when he would get a copy of one of his new books from alfred a. knopf?
and the last story i'm going to talk about is quite a story.
so how do we show this?
so even though we love publishing as an art, we very much know it's a business too, and that if we do our jobs right and get a little lucky, that great art can be great business.
now, i want to start with a question: when was the last time you were called childish?
like my wish that no one went hungry or that everything were a free kind of utopia.
how many of you still dream like that and believe in the possibilities?
and that's a good thing because in order to make anything a reality, you have to dream about it first.
kids already do a lot of learning from adults, and we have a lot to share.
i think that adults should start learning from kids.
the students should teach their teachers.
if i doubt my older sister's ability to pay back the 10 percent interest i established on her last loan, i'm going to withhold her ability to get more money from me until she pays it back.
my own parents had anything but low expectations for me and my sister.
thank you bill gates and thank you ma.
i wrote over 300 short stories on that little laptop, and i wanted to get published.
but the way progress happens is because new generations and new eras grow and develop and become better than the previous ones.
adults and fellow tedsters, you need to listen and learn from kids and trust us and expect more from us.
you must lend an ear today, because we are the leaders of tomorrow, which means we're going to be taking care of you when you're old and senile.
are you ready to make the match?
this was me running around in the back garden mid-summer.
in ireland the obvious choice is the military, but to be honest it actually kind of sucks.
my mother wanted me to be a dentist.
but the problem was that people kept blowing everything up.
they forced us to learn things like latin.
and so students like myself with nothing to do, we would learn how to program it.
so i brought a picture with big hair.
i just want to get that out of the way.
to play a game in those days you had to have an imagination to believe that you were really playing "battlestar galactica."
it was around this time we went from 1k to 16k, which was quite the leap.
so i went on for the next 20 years or so making a lot of different games.
because i was from the united kingdom, they thought the word ninja was a little too mean for children, so they decided to call it hero instead.
and interestingly, the people who buy the most games are 37.
you have to remember that this is not a real island.
they found clever ways to trade items and to sell their accounts to each other so that they could make money while they were playing their games.
so as far as popularity of games, what do you think these people are doing here?
what do you think these people are doing?
and this is happening in every city around the world.
but what i want you to do is to try to understand it.
but i want you to try and think about what games could look like 10 years from now.
this is an example of the kind of graphics you need to be able to draw if you wanted to get a job in the video game industry today.
so the obvious thing for me to talk about today is graphics and audio.
and these are the kind of topics we really actually care about.
so this is a student's opinion on what his experience of games are.
but as was the case for most of my generation, i spent a lot of time in front of the tv.
from an early age i learned to invest myself emotionally in what unfolded before me on screen.
i am just one of a new generation that is growing up.
a generation who may experience much more meaning through video games than they will through the real world.
and while my sense of free will in these virtual worlds may still be limited, what i do learn applies to my real life.
it lies in that these games are beginning to make me emotional.
i know what i want and i do it.
these are all troubles outside of myself.
something has happened to my brain.
perhaps there is a single part of our brain that holds all of our gut instincts, the things we know to do before we even think.
as gamers we are now living by the same laws of physics in the same cities and doing many of the same things we once did in real life, only virtually.
when i am driving down a road at sunset all i can think is, this is almost as beautiful as my games are.
more beautiful and rich than the real world around us.
i know that i am losing my grip.
part of me is just waiting to let go.
i know though, that no matter how amazing video games may become, or how flat the real world may seem to us, that we must stay aware of what our games are teaching us and how they leave us feeling when we finally do unplug.
and what was interesting about it is the obvious choice for me to talk about was graphics and audio.
the most important one being fun.
who is that going to come from?
is it going to come from the best directors in the world as we thought it probably would?
i think it's going to come from the children who are growing up now that aren't stuck with all of the stuff that we remember from the past.
some of the ideas are really dreadful and some of them are great.
dp: this is just a cool shot, because this is students coming to school after class.
he would have a great time.
and i must say, i thought of quite a few objects that i might try to swallow today and finally gave up on, but he just did it and that was a wonderful thing.
we go to magic shows in order to be fooled.
and this makes many things fun, but it makes it difficult to actually get any kind of picture on the world we live in or on ourselves.
i certainly would like to know what happened to the person who had that insight back then, if they actually followed it to its ultimate conclusion.
so if the world is not as it seems and we see things as we are, then what we call reality is a kind of hallucination happening inside here.
somehow we have to understand ourselves to get around our flaws.
we can think of ourselves as kind of a noisy channel.
once you start down at this very humble level, then you can start finding ways to see things.
it's this change in perspective on what it is we think we're perceiving that has helped us make more progress in the last 400 years than we have in the rest of human history.
so one of the things that goes from simple to complex is when we do more.
those three things give rise to all the different levels of what seem to be complexity in our world.
and that leaves two open areas that are kind of suspicious ...
that is all you have to do.
and what this teacher did on every project was to have the children act like first it was a creative arts project, and then something like science.
so they had created these artifacts.
now she had them look at them and do this ... laborious, which i thought for a long time, until she explained to me was to slow them down so they'll think.
but the whole point of this thing is for them to look at this chart and fill it out.
and so six-year-old lauren there noticed that the first one took one, and the second one took three more and the total was four on that one, the third one took five more and the total was nine on that one, and then the next one.
she saw right away that the additional tiles that you had to add around the edges was always going to grow by two, so she was very confident about how she made those numbers there.
and she could see that these were the square numbers up until about six, where she wasn't sure what six times six was and what seven times seven was, but then she was confident again.
and so the first idea here is just to show you the kind of things that children do.
and i get a little object here and i can look inside this object, i'll call it a car.
if i want to make a little script to do this over and over again, i just drag these guys out and set them going.
see the car turn by five here?
make it go in the other direction.
if i turn this wheel, you can see that number over there going minus and positive.
you know how much trouble the children have with variables, but by learning it this way, in a situated fashion, they never forget from this single trial what a variable is and how to use it.
so if you look at the little script here, the speed is always going to be 30.
so how do the children do science?
and it was not until galileo actually did it that an adult thought like a child, only 400 years ago.
we get one child like that about every classroom of 30 kids who will actually cut straight to the chase.
now, what if we want to look at this more closely?
and so what we can do is we can lay out the frames side by side or stack them up.
so what i'm doing is measuring from the bottom of one image to the bottom of the next image, about a fifth of a second later, like that.
and how shall we look and verify that we actually have it?
and i thought i would do just one thing on the $100 laptop here just to prove that this stuff works here.
it almost made me feel a little bit guilty about having an uplifting talk about the future.
it felt wrong to do that in some way.
and yet, i don't really think it is because when it comes down to it, it's this larger trajectory that is really what is going to remain -- what people in the future are going to remember about this period.
the reason i'm doing that is because those are going to be the areas that are the most significant to us.
the reason for that is really very simple.
and what we can do with our biology is going to shape our future and that of our children and that of their children -- whether we gain control over aging, whether we learn to protect ourselves from alzheimer's, and heart disease, and cancer.
and i'm actually going to use his words in the same order that he did.
and then from hour to hour we rot and rot.
and we need to think about planning a little bit.
now i know there's been a whole lot of hype about our power to control biology.
and i just want to say that that is absolutely not going to be the case.
before it's all done we are going to alter ourselves every bit as much as we have changed the world around us.
it will really make us question what it is to be a human being.
the most immediate changes that we'll see are things like in medicine.
but who is going to pay for all this?
and how are we going to understand all this complex information?
another thing is that we're just going to have to deal with this knowledge.
and look around you and know that what we really care about is that little bit of difference.
we look the same to a visitor from another planet, maybe, but not to each other because we compete with each other all time.
to deny that that's the case is not a very good start on that.
a generation or so away there are going to be even more profound things that are going to happen.
what if you could take a little concoction of pharmaceuticals that would make you feel really contented, just happy to be you.
why do you do what you do?
there are three obvious ways of doing this.
it will happen in five to 10 years.
and when it does it's not going to be that big a deal.
as that becomes possible this is going to move from something that is used by those who have infertility problems and are already doing in vitro fertilization, to the wealthy who want to protect their children, to just about everybody else.
and one that is not heritable because who would want to pass on to their children the archaic enhancement modules that they got 25 years earlier from their parents?
they are really going to come to operate in this realm.
now not everything that can be done should be done.
people can try and ban these things.
and it's going to deny us the information that we need to make wise decisions about how to use these technologies.
some people are going to see this as an abomination, as the worst thing, as just awful.
there is a lot in this rich biota that is going to serve us well.
if you look forward, i mean future humans, far before the end of this millennium, in a few hundred years, they are going to look back at this moment.
they are going to forget about all that stuff.
and they are actually going to romanticize this moment in time.
they are going to think about it as this glorious instant when we laid down the very foundations of their lives, of their society, of their future.
and then what comes out of it?
actually as was pointed out earlier, we forget about all the struggle there was in getting there.
so to me, it's clear that one of the foundations of that future is going to be the reworking of our biology.
i think that we should be proud of it.
what is so difficult and challenging is that we are also the objects of these changes.
and that is why they are so very troubling to so many people who would pull back in fear.
i think that our choice in the choice of life, is not whether we're going to go down this path.
i think thucydides really spoke to us very clearly in 430 b.c.
so how could that ever happen?"
and then she said, "but how does it happen when a man and woman are together?
what if two just people saw each other on the street, like a man and a woman, they just started doing it.
then we got home and we see the cat.
and then she got all caught up in the legs.
i was already up at 4.4.
this is a model of my aorta.
i've got a real one in my pocket, if anyone would like to look at it and play with it.
four and a half hours on the table and everything was done.
there are some problems with it.
but there will be nobody else in this room that understands all of those four words.
taking the jargon out was very important to ensure that everyone in the team understood exactly what was meant when a particular phrase was used.
and then we realized that it was actually a mirror image of the real aorta.
and it was a mirror image because in the real world we always look down on plans, plans of houses or streets or maps.
everyone needs to understand what is assumed and what is not assumed.
and they made extra problems for us.
we had to get past the nice problem.
so any of the hospitals interested can come along, read the nice report get in touch with us and then get doing it themselves.
a big problem with understanding one of those perspectives: when we first approached one of the big u.k.
so in the end i went to private investors and i just gave up on it.
the middle point is simply the way that the doctors protect themselves.
dead easy to give him respect.
and if you can bring those guys together and you can get them talking and understanding each other, the results can be spectacular.
i'm so embarrassed at how cheap it was to get from my idea to me being implanted that i'm not prepared to tell you what it cost.
if you have any questions, please come up and talk to me later on.
it would be a pleasure to speak with you.
for those of you old enough to remember, we used to have to go to the store to steal it.
and it has changed the way your future employer will look at your application.
they were used first by a danish newspaper, which wanted to make a point on islam.
this is not how it works."
in the united nations, half of the world is pushing to penalize the offense to religion -- they call it the defamation of religion -- while the other half of the world is fighting back in defense of freedom of speech.
this looks like a giant hamburger.
i was there to report on that story in cartoons.
i went to places like gaza during the war in 2009.
and of course, i went to see the rebels in the north.
and i went to see the dozo.
they are believed to have magical powers.
they can disappear and escape bullets.
so this was a great project.
he has to keep his job.
well i believe that in any context anywhere, he always has the choice at least not to do a cartoon that will feed hatred.
i think we all always have the choice in the end not to do the bad thing.
so, i want to start out with this beautiful picture from my childhood.
and i really do think we have to start thinking about what's a good planet and what isn't.
so, a planet like us is going to have an age and an old age, and we are in its golden summer age right now.
how long did it take to go from one system to the next?
and what they found was something unexpected.
and the black rock is the sediment on the sea bottom in the absence of plankton.
i was so lucky to watch the change of that south africa into the new south africa as i went year by year.
and what happens next is the age of dinosaurs.
you can see the eye socket and you can see the little teeth in the front.
they really want their world back.
and we know who was there.
in this particular case, the source over and over has been flood basalts.
and we think this is the reason that complexity took so long to take place on planet earth.
but the thing about this is that every once in a while we divers can run into trouble, so i'm going to do a little thought experiment here.
this is a great white shark that ate some of my traps.
and we can now use this as what i think will be a major medical breakthrough.
here is a way we can get people to critical care.
and so this is one of the great challenges that is going to happen.
what are you going to do?
i want to be able to go back to this reef.
and we go back to the fossil record and we could try to detect how many of these have happened in the past.
we buy it for our kids.
some of them are just countries who believe that deregulation or no regulation is the best way to attract investment, promote trade.
i know that none of us want to be accessories after the fact of a human rights abuse in a global supply chain.
we need to recognize just how serious a deficit of rights we have.
but take the example of heparin.
the problem was that it killed more people.
and you can just look at the headlines.
so they formed a white house task force, and they spent about three years arguing about who takes how much responsibility in the global supply chain.
you need a place where people can come together, sit down without fear of judgment, without recrimination, to actually face the problem, agree on the problem and come up with solutions.
i hate the idea that governments are not protecting human rights around the world.
do they have the resources to face up to a serious pandemic?
i know as well that this often seems like an overwhelming level of responsibility for people to assume.
but we break it down to some basic realities.
it starts with just giving people back their dignity.
please ask them to treat us like human beings."
we can all make a decision to come together and pick up the balls and run with the balls that governments have dropped.
and she's going to learn that this life will hit you hard in the face, wait for you to get back up just so it can kick you in the stomach.
but getting the wind knocked out of you is the only way to remind your lungs how much they like the taste of air.
so the first time she realizes that wonder woman isn't coming, i'll make sure she knows she doesn't have to wear the cape all by herself because no matter how wide you stretch your fingers, your hands will always be too small to catch all the pain you want to heal.
you're just smelling for smoke so you can follow the trail back to a burning house, so you can find the boy who lost everything in the fire to see if you can save him.
or else find the boy who lit the fire in the first place, to see if you can change him."
 when you open your hands to catch and wind up with only blisters and bruises; when you step out of the phone booth and try to fly and the very people you want to save are the ones standing on your cape; when your boots will fill with rain, and you'll be up to your knees in disappointment.
and those are the very days you have all the more reason to say thank you.
because there's nothing more beautiful than the way the ocean refuses to stop kissing the shoreline, no matter how many times it's sent away.
but i want her to know that this world is made out of sugar.
remember that good things come in threes and so do bad things.
all right, so i want you to take a moment, and i want you to think of three things that you know to be true.
so here are three things i know to be true.
and i know that i have been waiting all week to tell this joke.
because he was out standing in his field.
okay, so these are three things i know to be true.
but there are plenty of things i have trouble understanding.
sometimes the only way i know how to work through something is by writing a poem.
and despite my fear of ever being looked at for too long, i was fascinated by the idea of spoken word poetry.
so i decided to give it a try.
she was maybe eight feet tall and looked like she could beat me up with one hand, but instead she just nodded at me and said, "hey, i really felt that.
and it was here, listening to these poets share their stories, that i learned that spoken word poetry didn't have to be indignant, it could be fun or painful or serious or silly.
now i can divide my spoken word journey into three steps.
and that was thanks to a girl in a hoodie.
i will keep coming back week after week."
when i was in high school i had created project v.o.i.c.e.
as a way to encourage my friends to do spoken word with me.
so i came up with lists.
at a certain point, you would realize that someone has the exact same thing, or one thing very similar, to something on your list.
and then someone else has something the complete opposite of yours.
and i tell people that this is where great stories start from -- these four intersections of what you're passionate about and what others might be invested in.
and so she wrote her first poem, a love poem unlike any i had ever heard before.
but i try to walk through life like this.
i'm always trying to find the best way to tell each story.
not everyone can read music or owns a camera, but everyone can communicate in some way, and everyone has stories that the rest of us can learn from.
it's not uncommon for people to feel like they're alone or that nobody understands them, but spoken word teaches that if you have the ability to express yourself and the courage to present those stories and opinions, you could be rewarded with a room full of your peers, or your community, who will listen.
it's not enough to just teach that you can express yourself.
i spent a lot of time thinking about the best way to tell this story, and i wondered if the best way was going to be a powerpoint or a short film -- and where exactly was the beginning or the middle or the end?
i think that we all did.
and what was left of the city soon followed.
she says i have old eyes.
my knees still buckle every time i get on a stage.
they feel exactly what you feel at the same time that you feel it.
i start quickly becoming part of your past.
and that is the greatest present of all.
and i understood that documentary photography has the ability to interpret events from their point of view.
it gives a voice to those who otherwise would not have a voice.
every story does not have to sell something.
that was a tradition i wanted to follow.
the reaction on the streets was violent confrontation.
this is a moment from the beginning of the second intifada, in 2000, when it was still stones and molotovs against an army.
the bosnian soldier who guided me told me that all of his friends were there now.
one of the things i had to learn as a journalist was what to do with my anger.
after several weeks, they washed off the white and took on the full responsibilities of men.
i also want it to be powerful and eloquent, and to do as much justice as possible to the experience of the people i'm photographing.
this man was in an ngo feeding center, being helped as much as he could be helped.
he had not given up, and if he didn't give up, how could anyone in the outside world ever dream of losing hope?
the next day i left for rwanda, and it was like taking the express elevator to hell.
he allowed me to photograph him for quite a long time, and he even turned his face toward the light, as if he wanted me to see him better.
i think he knew what the scars on his face would say to the rest of the world.
the imprint of a man who had been burned inside his own home.
i spent a good deal of time with a man who lived with his family on a railway embankment and had lost an arm and a leg in a train accident.
a trust fund was established, and the family now lives in a house in the countryside and all their basic necessities are taken care of.
i tried to tell the story through the work of caregivers.
so many children have been orphaned by the epidemic that grandmothers have taken the place of parents, and a lot of children had been born with hiv.
a few minutes later when i looked again and saw the second tower burning, i knew we were at war.
a boy who lost a leg to a leftover mine.
a marketplace was hit by a mortar shell that killed several members of a single family.
a group of men march through the streets cutting themselves with knives.
it was obvious that the shi'ites were a force to be reckoned with, and we would do well to understand them and learn how to deal with them.
military medicine has become so efficient that the percentage of troops who survive after being wounded is much higher in this war than in any other war in our history.
good people had been put in a very bad situation for questionable results.
sometimes they put their lives on the line, because they believe your opinions and your influence matter.
and therefore i will limit myself to only talk about the links between religion and sexuality.
this is a very serious talk.
so i will talk of what i remember as the most wonderful.
my talk will be about the impact of religions on the number of babies per woman.
this is indeed important, because everyone understands that there is some sort of limit on how many people we can be on this planet.
and there are some people who say that the world population is growing like this -- three billion in 1960, seven billion just last year -- and it will continue to grow because there are religions that stop women from having few babies, and it may continue like this.
what has happened since, and what do the experts predict will happen with the number of children during this century?
will it remain the same and be two billion by the end of the century?
will the number of children increase each year up to 15 years, or will it continue in the same fast rate and be four billion children up there?
i will tell you by the end of my speech.
so we went on and we looked in wikipedia, we found this map.
the white here are countries which cannot be classified, because one religion does not reach 50 percent or there is doubt about the data or there's some other reason.
so we were careful with that.
so bear with our simplicity now when i take you over to this shot.
the reason for that is that many people say you have to get rich first before you get few babies.
but there was also many christian countries that had six to seven babies per woman.
but they were in latin america or they were in africa.
and by 2010, we are actually 80 percent of humans who live in countries with about two children per woman.
i can tell you that the data on the number of children per woman is surprisingly good in all countries.
we get that from the census data.
so what we can conclude is you don't have to get rich to have few children.
it has happened across the world.
there is a difference with income.
the countries which have many babies per woman here, they have quite low income.
because the death of a child is compensated by one more child.
these countries have six children per woman.
they have a sad death rate of one to two children per woman.
and many think that these countries are stagnant, but they are not.
i take them backwards here to their independence, when they were up here in the beginning of the 1960s.
just look what they have done.
well we know quite well what is needed in these countries.
you need to have children to survive.
you need to get out of the deepest poverty so children are not of importance for work in the family.
and you need the fourth factor, which perhaps is the most important factor.
and what is the reason in qatar?
well i do as i always do.
there are countries up here which are very poor.
so when i go back now to give you the answer of the quiz, it's two.
the number of children is not growing any longer in the world.
but why do they grow if the number of children doesn't grow?
well i will show you here.
so what will happen now is what we call "the big fill-up."
because before 1980, there were much fewer people born than there were during the last 30 years.
so what will happen now is quite straightforward.
and then again the old will die and you will get two billion children.
and can you see that this increase took place without life getting longer and without adding children?
religion has very little to do with the number of babies per woman.
so when you discuss and when you plan for the resources and the energy needed for the future, for human beings on this planet, you have to plan for 10 billion.
so there are a few things that bring us humans together in the way that an election does.
we all understand why we have elections, and we all leave the house on the same day to go and vote.
we cherish the opportunity to have our say, to help decide the future of the country.
well unfortunately, power corrupts, and so people will do lots of things to get power and to stay in power, including doing bad things to elections.
to make sure as few things as possible go wrong, we have all these procedures around the election.
and most people would go home and feel sure that their vote has been counted, because they trust that the election system works.
most of us have to trust that that happens correctly for our own vote, and we all have to trust that that happens correctly for all the votes in the election.
so we have to trust a lot of people.
we have to trust a lot of procedures.
and sometimes we even have to trust computers.
well in the face of all these bad headlines, researchers have taken a step back and thought about how we can do elections differently.
so this is how you vote.
no hacker can break in and find out how you voted.
there's nothing that makes you feel more -- the blessing and the honor of working in a program like that than to know that something that horrible no longer exists.
but first i'm going to tell you a little bit about my own journey.
i went out to alcatraz, and i lived on the island for several weeks.
someone saw me on television; they called me up; and they asked me if i'd like to be in a movie and to play a young doctor for a bunch of rock and roll stars who were traveling in a bus ride from san francisco to england.
it killed more people than all the wars in history.
this is the most important slide that i've ever seen in public health because it shows you to be the richest and the strongest, and to be kings and queens of the world, did not protect you from dying of smallpox.
never can you doubt that we are all in this together.
you should see it from the perspective of a mother watching her child develop this disease and standing by helplessly.
there are other kinds of smallpox that are not like that.
this is confluent smallpox, in which there isn't a single place on the body where you could put a finger and not be covered by lesions.
you had to find every single case of smallpox in the world at the same time and draw a circle of immunity around it.
in india alone, my 150,000 best friends and i went door to door with that same picture to every single house in india.
let's get another disease off the list of terrible things to worry about.
i hope that you will take a look at it.
i stand here as a representative of all terrible things -- this might be the worst.
the world as we know it will stop.
i did a study of the top epidemiologists in the world in october.
if it happens, how bad do you think it will be?
and it's getting worse because travel is getting so much better.
if we could find it early, and we had early detection and early response, and we could put each one of those viruses in jail -- that's the only way to deal with something like a pandemic.
and let me show you why that is.
you usually arrive right about here.
what we really want is to arrive right here, so we can stop the epidemic.
we need an early-warning system to protect us against the things that are humanity's worst nightmare.
it is so obvious that our only way of dealing with these new diseases is to find them early and to kill them before they spread.
then a number of years went by, and there were a lot of rumors about bird flu.
who took a little while taking action because who will only receive a report from a government, because it's the united nations.
but they were able to point to who and let them know that there was this surprising and unexplained cluster of illnesses that looked like bird flu.
that turned out to be sars.
and because of that we were able to stop sars.
i was this weird little kid who wanted to have deep talks about the worlds that might exist beyond the ones that we perceive with our senses.
i wanted to know if what we human beings see and hear and think is a full and accurate picture of reality.
and then a wonderful thing happened when i was in high school: gurus from the east started washing up on the shores of america.
so what did he mean by this?
take a breath right now of this clear air in this room.
my years as a mystic have made me question almost all my assumptions.
but we all actually have the same capacity that they do, and we need to do their work now.
now if the idea of taking any of these people to lunch makes you lose your appetite, i suggest you start more local, because there is no shortage of the other right in your own neighborhood.
maybe that person who worships at the mosque, or the church or the synagogue, down the street.
so first of all, decide on a goal: to get to know one person from a group you may have negatively stereotyped.
and we used these questions: share some of your life experiences with me.
and what have you always wanted to ask someone from the other side?
my lunch partner and i came away with some really important insights, and i'm going to share just one with you.
i think it has relevance to any problem between people anywhere.
but we also hadn't pretended that our differences were just going to melt away after a lunch.
who should you invite to lunch?
next time you catch yourself in the act of otherizing, that will be your clue.
and what might happen at your lunch?
and at the end of a shoot, i would sometimes feel that i had photographs that told a better story than a sometimes-sensational documentary.
but at the same time, i questioned myself and my own integrity and purpose in storytelling.
and i decided that i had compromised, just like my friends in those discussions, where we told stories in contexts we made excuses for, rather than taking responsibility for.
but what i saw opened my eyes to an idea of forgiveness which i never thought possible.
he begs for forgiveness, and receives it from the same woman whose brother he murdered.
he risked his life as he walked up to people whose families he'd murdered.
the second story i'm going to tell you about is about a group of very special fighting women with rather unique peace-keeping skills.
the commander told me that a woman could gauge a potentially violent situation much better than men.
many of the women are married with children, and they say the hardest part of their deployment was being kept away from their children.
something amazing happened during this shoot.
and how are we responsible for this?
they lack even the most basic amenities.
and this is something that is common to all our big cities.
in india we often love to complain about our government bodies.
something wonderful in a country where manual labor is often looked down upon.
so this was a story in kenya a few years ago.
and so it came in from the outside.
so this is just the first of three attacks that occurred in that scene.
there were between 18 and 26 people killed all together.
ja: not that we have seen with anything we have released.
what would you say to that?
ca: so you found a way to shine light into what you see as these sort of dark secrets in companies and in government.
can you show that you had legal authority over that document?
ca: so help us understand a bit about you personally and how you came to do this.
and i think i read that as a kid you went to 37 different schools.
so you have to be careful with hacker.
can you give us a sense of what they are and maybe some incident in your life that helped determine them?
and that's something from my father and something from other capable, generous men that have been in my life.
and so that is something that has been in my character for a long time.
it was the hardest hit of any country in the world.
which way is it going to go?
all of my work begins very simple.
and from all of these numbers, i start with only two or three variables.
that means that it is the numbers that control the form, not me.
when you step closer, you actually see that it is indeed all made up of numbers.
so all of these scores are made up of weather data.
this piece here is read very differently depending on where you place it.
you place it in a music hall, it all of a sudden becomes a musical score.
and not everyone has a ph.d.
now you might wonder how a 13 year-old girl could come up with this idea.
and i was led to it through a series of events.
so i was very surprised about this.
the second stage was completed at the penn state university main campus lab, which is where i extracted the chemicals, changed the ph so i could run it through the equipment and separated the compounds i needed from the rest of the chicken.
is it worth it to you?
and i want all of you to imagine a little girl holding a dead blue spinach plant.
but that was me years ago.
and i remember watching my family go through that and thinking that i never wanted another family to feel that kind of loss.
got rejected by all except one.
one in 100 will die from it.
so we ran all of these tests blocking the protein, and we saw this huge shift.
in fact, it means that if a patient comes in and they're resistant to this drug, then if we give them a chemical to block this protein, then we can treat them again with the same drug.
it was about finding my passion.
and this can be used by anyone.
this is the measurement that she took in her doctor's office.
stop the use of incense and candles.
but before i end my talk today, i want to leave you with one saying.
and that made a huge impact on me when i was doing this research.
but if each one of us takes initiative in our own home, in our own school and in our own workplace, we can make a huge difference in air quality.
so i want you to reimagine a world with better air quality, better quality of life and better quality of living for everyone including our future generations.
we are all different from different perspectives.
but i think being different is good, because you present a different point of view.
that was the first day i set my foot in a five-star hotel.
why can't they have their own ideas and their own voice?"
and so i was in the second round of competition, and then the third and the fourth.
well after a few years, i decided to go to the u.s.
so we do a lot of things.
but then we are also so fortunate to witness the transformation of the whole country.
all those expensive items were given to her as gifts by her boyfriend, who used to be a board member in a subdivision of red cross at chamber of commerce.
most of them have fairly good education.
and you know we have the tradition that younger generations support the elders financially, and taking care of them when they're sick.
so making a living is not that easy for young people.
and for those who are ready to get married and buy their apartment, they figured out they have to work for 30 to 40 years to afford their first apartment.
but they died because of all different personal reasons.
sometimes people get killed, and sometimes people set themselves on fire to protest.
while young people seem to be very sure about their participation in public policy-making, but sometimes they're a little bit lost in terms of what they want for their personal life.
it does not mean they will wear nothing in the wedding, but it shows that these young couples are ready to get married without a house, without a car, without a diamond ring and without a wedding banquet, to show their commitment to true love.
so happiness is the most popular word we have heard through the past two years.
i guess these are the questions people are going to answer.
i was speaking to a group of about 300 kids, ages six to eight, at a children's museum, and i brought with me a bag full of legs, similar to the kinds of things you see up here, and had them laid out on a table for the kids.
so i made a deal with the adults that the kids could come in without any adults for two minutes on their own.
it should be go go gadget!"
so some of you actually saw me at ted, 11 years ago.
and people would come up to me after the conference, after my talk, men and women.
what does a beautiful woman have to look like?
it can transform the thing that might have made people fearful into something that invites them to look, and look a little longer, and maybe even understand.
this is where it really hit home for me -- that my legs could be wearable sculpture.
and i had these legs made a little over a year ago at dorset orthopedic in england and when i brought them home to manhattan, my first night out on the town, i went to a very fancy party.
and a girl was there who has known me for years at my normal 5'8".
and i was having fun with it.
i want to talk to you a little bit about user-generated content.
i'm going to tell you three stories on the way to one argument that's going to tell you a little bit about how we open user-generated content up for business.
this is what he had to say.
when i was a boy, in front of every house in the summer evenings, you would find young people together singing the songs of the day, or the old songs.
this is a picture of culture.
never before in the history of human culture had it been as professionalized, never before as concentrated.
i mean the culture that your kids are producing all the time.
taking the songs of the day and the old songs and remixing them to make them something different.
i want to share all my love with you ...
no one else will do ...
they tell me how much you care ...
looked first to the courts and the legislatures to try to get them to do something to make the system make more sense.
the same thing can happen now.
that artist choice is the key for new technology having an opportunity to be open for business, and we need to build artist choice here if these new technologies are to have that opportunity.
but let me end with something i think much more important -- much more important than business.
they live life knowing they live it against the law.
and you should be really afraid, but not for the reasons why you think you should be.
and if you want to take a single crystal of dna, it looks like that.
and this is the single most exciting adventure that we have ever been on.
because we're just beginning to learn where we came from and what we are.
it may turn out to be something that looks a little like that amoeba.
and then finally somebody picked up a microscope and looked at the water that was sitting next to the cores.
we should have known that this existed because this is the only bacteria that you can see to the naked eye.
it lives in a deep trench off the coast of namibia.
and you can do strange things with this stuff.
when you do that, the cow gives birth to a gar.
and then you can start going back further, and you can start thinking about dodos, and you can think about other species.
and it's all coming out of things that look like this.
and it will be really boring.
and laurie's going to talk about this one a little bit.
in the measure that you have the code and the measure that you read it -- and, by the way, the first plant was read two years ago; the first human was read two years ago; the first insect was read two years ago.
this is what you look like.
this is one of your chromosomes.
the reason why he's reprogramming that animal to have more wings is because when you used to play with lizards as a little child, and you picked up the lizard, sometimes the tail fell off, but it regrew.
this is the way it should be seen.
that's why you differ from this person over here by one in a thousand.
and they look at the world a little differently.
they look at the same world and they say...
the greatest repository of knowledge when most of us went to college was this thing, and it turns out that this is not so important any more.
you can break this out by states.
and you can watch states rise and fall depending on their ability to speak a language of life, and you can watch new york fall off a cliff, and you can watch new jersey fall off a cliff, and you can watch the rise of the new empires of intelligence.
that means you don't need to be a big nation to be successful; it means you don't need a lot of people to be successful; and it means you can move most of the wealth of a country in about three or four carefully picked 747s.
because in agriculture, if you had 10 kids and you grow up a little bit earlier and you work a little bit harder, you could produce about five times more wealth, on average, than your neighbor.
because it really matters who speaks life.
and it turns out that if you went back to the 1870s, the most productive nation on earth was australia, per person.
and today, of course, you all know that the most productive nation on earth is luxembourg, producing about one third more wealth per person per year than america.
here's how many people it takes to produce a single u.s.
he still crashes the country because he doesn't understand how the rules have changed.
people are taking control of their own states, sometimes for the better and sometimes for the worse.
so i was thinking, can you remove us as creators and try to make the music be the voice and have the animation following it?
song: before god destroyed the people on the earth, he warned noah to build an ark.
and after noah built his ark, i believe he told noah to warn the people that they must change all their wicked ways before he come upon them and destroy them.
and the song began to move on i understand like this.
and then he went and knocked an old lady house.
also the person sitting in your very seats is a liar.
they use it to get to the truth, and they do what mature leaders do everyday; they have difficult conversations with difficult people, sometimes during very difficult times.
its power emerges when someone else agrees to believe the lie.
now not all lies are harmful.
and boy are we willing to fill in those gaps in our lives with lies.
on a given day, studies show that you may be lied to anywhere from 10 to 200 times.
but in another study, it showed that strangers lied three times within the first 10 minutes of meeting each other.
we lie more to strangers than we lie to coworkers.
men lie eight times more about themselves than they do other people.
women lie more to protect other people.
by the time you enter college, you're going to lie to your mom in one out of every five interactions.
well there are steps we can take to navigate our way through the morass.
why is it so easy to learn?
there are good liars and there are bad liars.
we all make the same mistakes.
we all use the same techniques.
and then we're going to look at the hot spots and see if we can find them ourselves.
i did not have sexual relations with that woman, miss lewinsky.
and i need to go back to work for the american people.
we know that liars will unconsciously distance themselves from their subject using language as their tool.
and we all do it no matter how powerful you are.
now this brings us to our next pattern, which is body language.
an honest person is going to be cooperative.
well we all do the same thing.
but i know she looked at you with those amazing brown eyes, and you still wanted to kill her.
my world is going to be one where truth is strengthened and falsehood is recognized and marginalized."
and when you do that, the ground around you starts to shift just a little bit.
what we know about how to be who we are comes from stories.
my love is like twelve ethiopian goats standing still in the morning light.
the language actually makes the world in which we live.
but these are not new to africa.
if she does it again tomorrow, i'm going to throw myself off this building and kill myself."
and it happened over four continents.
a lot of us are very privileged.
my story of nigeria growing up was very different from the story i encountered in prison, and i had no language for it.
i was completely terrified, completely broken, and kept trying to find a new language, a new way to make sense of all of this.
now for those of you who have seen me at the buffet tables know that it was because it was costing them too much to feed me.
and i watched them being locked up in prison and tear gassed.
have i not myself been imprisoned?
have i not myself been beaten?"
but this is a good thing.
i want to believe that we can be agnostic about this, that we can rise above all of this.
not because i was encountering homosexual sex and love for the first time, but because the way james wrote about it made it impossible for me to attach otherness to it.
last night i heard my daughter praying for the meat here at my feet.
now i have beaten a song back into you.
rise and walk away like a panther."
and before that, i was a silversmith, and before that, i was -- i was out of the house at about 15 and a half, and i never wound up going into college.
this is how they looked when they came out at the end.
so this is some fighting robots.
i thought everyone would want these.
and they made it into a toy, and then they dropped it like a hot rock.
so this is a -- i used to kind of be an actor.
and over to the left is a view master of the cd-rom.
this is a -- you can see the little window there.
way ahead of my time here.
most of them did not go.
you get one out of 20, one out of 30 products.
i have the why over here, and the how over there.
i try to do a lot of philosophy, a lot of thinking about all of these projects.
then i started to get a little more realistic and i have to start drawing the stuff.
so that turned out to be a little more than true.
i get up and start cutting my finger and gluing things together.
so she comes to the rescue.
and then she started doing these other images.
and i started working with solid works and a whole other group to do that.
and we started -- this was way back before there was really much sla going on, not a lot of rapid prototyping.
so this is how they come out close to the end.
and i just a little bit on each one.
and she still actually has those.
and then i started another company.
and so we actually went in.
if i do it kind of right, it might move kind of like the real thing.
we were just doing some tests here.
there was a tremendous amount of work to get all that working right.
you have to get the look for the skin.
so you hire artists, and you try to get the look and feel of the character.
so, now you go back and you cover the whole thing with clay.
and we think we can help that out by having little creatures that you can love.
and we have a -- i have a little something here.
and so i just -- i hope we all dream well.
one of my favorite parts of my job at the gates foundation is that i get to travel to the developing world, and i do that quite regularly.
and when i meet the mothers in so many of these remote places, i'm really struck by the things that we have in common.
they want what we want for our children and that is for their children to grow up successful, to be healthy, and to have a successful life.
but i am surprised by one thing that they do have: coca-cola.
so that's why i took a bit of time to study coke.
and i think there are really three things we can take away from coca-cola.
now coke has a very clear bottom line -- they report to a set of shareholders, they have to turn a profit.
so they take the data, and they use it to measure progress.
they learn something, they put it back into the product, they put it back into the market.
and so they took a bit of time to learn about that.
the government noticed in ethiopia that many of the people were so far away from a health clinic, they were over a day's travel away from a health clinic.
and in 2003, the government of ethiopia started this new system in their own country.
now the reason these micro-entrepreneurs can sell or make a profit is they have to sell every single bottle in their pushcart or their wheelbarrow.
it is associated that product with a kind of life that people want to live.
and they don't just guess what makes people happy; they go to places like latin america and they realize that happiness there is associated with family life.
we know that a million and a half children die a year from diarrhea and a lot of it is because of open defecation.
you start to talk to them about why open defecation is something that shouldn't be done in the village, and they agree to that.
women are refusing to marry men without toilets.
take a look at this -- this is a room full of young men and my husband, bill.
and can you guess what the young men are waiting for?
so if we can start to understand what people really want in health and development, we can change communities and we can change whole nations.
so let's talk about what happens when this all comes together, when you tie the three things together.
but let me make the story a little bit more concrete for you.
now it could have come from one of two places.
so many more people would have been affected.
and i'm happy to say only one other person in that area got polio.
so we are 99 percent of the way there on this goal and we're about to run short of money.
and it would only be the second disease ever wiped off the face of the planet.
and this victory is so possible.
and so if we can learn lessons from the innovators in every sector, then in the future we make together, that happiness can be just as ubiquitous as coca-cola.
and let me start with this.
something like this is what i first saw when i jumped in the water for the first time in the mediterranean coast off spain.
so i'm going to get us all on a time machine, and we're going to the left; we're going to go back to the past to see what the ocean was like.
what have we learned from these places?
this is what we thought was natural.
but you see here a big table coral that died and collapsed.
and let me go back to that image of the mediterranean.
this is what i saw when i was a kid.
so these places not only help the ecosystem but also help the people who can benefit from the ecosystem.
in some places up to 10 times larger biomass inside the reserves.
so we have all these things inside the reserve that grow, and what do they do?
but if we add the no-take reserve on top of that, the fishermen are still making more money by fishing less around an area that is protected.
it happened in many places around the caribbean.
so how much of this do we have?
if this is so good, if this is such a no-brainer, how much of this do we have?
so how can we do that?
and how can we reach that goal?
but what about the rest of the coast of the world, where people live and make a living out of fishing?
the stakes are just too high to continue the way we are going.
the big one is moving very slowly, and the small one is moving fast.
it would only cost 16 billion to set up 20 percent of the ocean as marine protected areas that actually give new living choices to the fishermen as well.
so thank you for those numbers.
a lot of the experience of people here who've been in the oceans for a long time has just been seeing this degradation, the places they saw that were beautiful getting worse, depressing.
talk to me about the feeling that you must have experienced of going to these pristine areas and seeing things coming back.
we go there to try to understand the ecosystems, to try to measure or count fish and sharks and see how these places are different from the places we know.
and if it were not for these places that show hope, i don't think i could continue doing this job.
it would be just too depressing.
so, by way of introduction, that is the exact same state in which i spent every working day of the last six years.
and both of these facts say less about you or my students than they do about what we call math education in the u.s.
this is also something that, the way we teach it in the u.s.
you finish your lecture block and immediately you have five hands going up asking you to re-explain the entire thing at their desks.
i am very concerned about this because i'm going to retire in a world that my students will run.
so i hope you can see.
so i want to put to you that if we can separate these in a different way and build them up with students, we can have everything we're looking for in terms of patient problem solving.
and this starts conversation because the visual is created in such a way where you can defend two answers.
and we realize how great would it be if we just had some a, b, c and d labels to talk about them more easily.
the question is: how long will it take you to fill it up?
does the side of it matter?
so now we have a water tank.
how long will it take you to fill it up?
so now we have the real deal.
how long will it take it to fill it up?
and the best part here, or one of the better parts is that we don't get our answer from the answer key in the back of the teacher's edition.
so i'm here to report some really fun games with students who come pre-installed with these viruses day one of the class.
this has been a lot of fun.
we need more patient problem solvers.
and we're going to tell you some stories from the sea here in video.
most of the animals are in the oceans.
most of the earthquakes and volcanoes are in the sea, at the bottom of the sea.
but see all those different working things?
i love that kind of stuff.
you can actually see through his head.
we see those at all depths and even at the greatest depths.
and then one of my favorites.
the height of these mountains on either side of this valley is greater than the alps in most cases.
because we see it in bits and pieces right now.
we see it either as sound, or we see it as video, or we see it as photographs, or we see it as chemical sensors, but we never have yet put it all together into one interesting picture.
dg: i think that's one of the greatest stories right now that we're seeing from the bottom of the sea, is that the first thing we see coming out of the sea floor after a volcanic eruption is bacteria.
and we started to wonder for a long time, how did it all get down there?
a mile and a half from the surface to two miles to three miles -- no sun has ever gotten down here.
there's a whole story being played out here that we're just now beginning to have some idea of because of this new camera technology.
everything you see is played out in the pitch black of the deep sea.
there are never any lights there, except the lights that we bring.
those pillars get up to several stories.
this is the first time we've ever tried this any place.
we want tomorrow's note to be the same as it was today."
so, what we've got to learn now is to find out where this planet's going at all these different scales and work with it.
the question that you will ask will determine much of the answer that you get.
and so if you ask this question: where would you look to see the future of education?
finland is the best place in the world to see school systems.
so i ended up in places like this.
we'll grow by six cities of 12 million people a year for the next 30 years.
and if you go to these places, you meet people like this.
he was going to be dead by the age of 25.
or you can go to places like this.
and the education they got was pitiful.
it was in places like this.
the other half have one parent because the other parent has died through aids.
so the challenges of education in this kind of place are not to learn the kings and queens of kenya or britain.
or you could go to places like this.
and the reason they carry on studying is not because they went to a school like this.
those girls have never touched google.
imagine what their lives would be like if you could get that to them.
you can go to places like this.
most of the children there have parents who are illiterate.
when you go to places like this what you see is that education in these settings works by pull, not push.
most of our education system is push.
i was literally pushed to school.
you need to start education from things that make a difference to them in their settings.
our education systems all work on the principle that there is a payoff, but you have to wait quite a long time.
waiting 10 years for the payoff from education is too long when you need to meet daily needs, when you've got siblings to look after or a business to help with.
so you need education to be relevant and help people to make a living there and then, often.
and so you attract people through that into learning, not adding that on after all the learning has been done and you've eaten your cognitive greens.
imagine that urban explosion that's going to take place across the developing world and how many thousands of children will spend their school years on building sites.
he'd spent three years in nairobi living on the streets because his parents had died of aids.
and he was finally brought back into school, not by the offer of gcses, but by the offer of learning how to become a carpenter, a practical making skill.
learning has to be productive in order for it to make sense.
and i learned it from this guy, who is an amazing character.
you should turn it into mcdonald's.
and what you do when you go to any new site is you kind of roll out a franchise.
and there will be no mistakes."
they know what to expect, even though it'll be subtly different and the colors will be different and the name will be different.
and what can we learn from all of that?
they fail to reach the people they most need to serve.
and as i said, the trouble with this is that, in the developing world there just aren't teachers to make this model work.
of 14 of them, only two of them are in schools.
most of them are in other buildings not designed as schools.
so we certainly need more of that.
every child up to the age of 15 who wants a place in school will be able to have one in 2015.
and of course it will bring great things.
but it will also lay waste to imagination.
it will lay waste to appetite.
that is why we need really radical thinking, and why radical thinking is now more possible and more needed than ever in how we learn.
and they are asking -- we should all be asking -- how do we use this time?
how do we live it successfully?
i come from a long line of depressives.
as i was approaching my late 40s, when i would wake up in the morning my first six thoughts would all be negative.
i have such a powerful feeling of well-being.
some of it is a matter of luck.
but that means that two-thirds of how well we do in the third act, we can do something about.
we're going to discuss what we can do to make these added years really successful and use them to make a difference.
selinger wrote the following to describe what was happening to him.
as i lost so much, i finally started to find myself."
perhaps our parents suffered from depression.
perhaps we feel that many of our relationships have not had closure.
and so we can feel unfinished.
perhaps the task of the third act is to finish up the task of finishing ourselves.
how was i supposed to live it?
and so i went back and i studied my first two acts, trying to see who i was then, who i really was -- not who my parents or other people told me i was, or treated me like i was.
how did they treat my parents?
you may discover, as i did, that a lot of things that you used to think were your fault, a lot of things you used to think about yourself, really had nothing to do with you.
and you're able to go back and forgive them and forgive yourself.
and he wrote this: "everything you have in life can be taken from you except one thing, your freedom to choose how you will respond to the situation.
it helps us become what we might have been.
but now, in our third acts, it may be possible for us to circle back to where we started and know it for the first time.
and if we can do that, it will not just be for ourselves.
and flowers are a real bugger.
why would they go to that bother?
and the reason that sexual reproduction is so important -- there are lots of other things that plants can do to reproduce.
some of you may have seen some of these pictures before.
there are markings on many plants that look like other insects.
they have to try and attract pollinators to do their bidding.
now you can imagine that if nectar is such a valuable thing and expensive for the plant to produce and it attracts lots of pollinators, then, just as in human sex, people might start to deceive.
do you want to come and get it?"
so this is a plant that is mimicking the first plant.
it thought it would get some.
they fly in and they pollinate.
they fly into this thing, and they fly all the way down it.
this is the most amazing thing.
this thing does something else which is unusual.
and what a wonderful thing it is.
these are little yellow flowers like we all see, little yellow flowers all over the place.
this is what it looks like if you take out the red.
but the contrast will look something like that, so standing out a lot from the background.
and i love the idea of something hidden.
and i believe this is going to prove true.
so here we can see the white represents low altitudes, and the blue are higher altitudes.
this is taking a look at atlanta.
and you can scroll around and see some of the different airports and the different patterns that they have.
and long beach on the bottom.
i started taking a look as well at different perimeters, because you can choose what you want to pull out from the data.
so this is another project that i worked on with the sensible cities lab at mit.
so this is an interactive tool that you can move around and see different parts of the city.
this is looking at another event.
and then you're going to see people start to gather in the center of the city to celebrate the night before, which happens right here.
so now on to something completely different.
some of you may recognize this.
so i created this drawing tool.
i asked people to draw a sheep facing to the left.
kind of amazing what some people did.
but only one of them out of the 7,599 said this.
we asked people to draw what it was that they saw.
so what you see is actually a representation of how well people did what it was they were asked to do.
this is again showing all the different contributions.
you may recognize these two guys.
this is what that sounded like.
we broke down all the individual notes in the singing as well as the phonemes in the singing.
this is what it would look like if you went to the site.
and this is what we first got back from the very first set of submissions.
so if you go to the bicyclebuiltfortwothousand.com you can actually hear what all this sounds like together.
and people were making some amazing things.
so with everybody making so much amazing stuff and actually understanding what it was they were working on, i was really interested in trying to make a collaborative project where people were working together to build something.
but we knew we really needed the right person to kind of rally behind and build something for.
so we put the idea on the back burner for a few months.
one is the beginning of the music video.
you can actually see the point when i know what i'm doing, and a lot of light and dark comes into it.
and you can also see the way that it was drawn.
and you can pick a style.
and we wanted to push the idea of the music video that was meant for the web beyond the four-by-three or sixteen-by-nine window and try to make it play out and choreograph throughout the screen.
so the project starts off by asking you to enter the address of the home where you grew up.
so this should really be seen at home with you typing in your own address, but i'm going to give you a little preview of what you can expect.
and as my image is already inside the paper, i just have to remove what's not from that story.
but i was also a rebel.
i moved for two years in taiwan.
they come in a lot of different shapes.
they can be with words or without words.
and my daily language is english.
so i want to see how things work and what's happening.
so each window is an image and is a world that i often revisit.
and we would leave a very low footprint on the planet.
and we can use them also as a safety net.
i was also interested in the physicality of this format, because you have to walk to see it.
i started with small images, i started with a few miles.
and running gives me a lot of energy.
there is no border in between.
and then you have all those individual stories where sometimes we even have the same action, and the result puts you in hells or in heavens.
so you can take it off the wall.
and then you can just walk behind them and try them on.
so it's like the different layers of what we are made of and what we present to the world as an identity.
why do i call it a book?
you take them for a walk.
but i added weathervanes on both sides to show that they cover all directions.
and then the fruit of the world for silicon valley today.
i took library material that had fruit in their title and i used them to make an orchard walk with these fruits of knowledge.
so each building has its own personality.
and i wanted to give them an escape.
so i can call it techno-crafted.
but the result is always to have stories.
they have a lot of scenarios.
but more important is everybody has to make a story to make sense of the world.
how had i spent my valuable time?
how could this have gone by like lightning?
and i couldn't forgive myself for the countless, countless hours i had lost in negative thought -- all the time i had spent beating myself up for losing my marriage and not stopping the sexual abuse when i was a kid and career moves and this and this and this.
and then my mother died at 82.
what am i going to do with this short amount of time that's just fleeting?
it was deep in my imagination.
as a matter of fact, this picture is supposed to be me during training.
and when i started in with the eight hours and the 10 hours and the 12 hours and the 14 hours and the 15 hours and the 24-hour swims, i knew i had it, because i was making it through these.
who cares the last two minutes?"
and i put together an expedition.
and there are all kinds of problems.
about the 50th hour, i was going to start thinking about the edge of the universe.
and there's nothing like swimming for 50 hours in the ocean that gets you thinking about things like this.
and i knew i could do it.
it's not going to feel this good all the way across.
and i was thinking of the hypothermia and maybe some shoulder pain and all the other things -- the vomiting that comes from being in the saltwater.
i don't know if you can still see the red line here and up the arm.
the most venomous animal that lives in the ocean is the box jellyfish.
and the next thing is paralysis.
i feel it in the back and then i feel it in the chest up here, and i can't breathe.
a young man on our boat is an emt.
they either die or they quickly get to a hospital.
and they got me out and they started again with the epinephrine and the prednisone and with the oxygen and with everything they had on board.
and i swam through that night and into the next day.
and how odd is this intelligent person who put this together and got all these world experts together.
as a matter of fact, the best advice i got was from an elementary school class in the caribbean.
and they have these long 30 to 40 to 50-ft.
and they can send the poison into the system.
and a little kid from the back was like this.
you need like a school of fish that would swim in front of you like this."
and little did i know, that you should listen to eight year-olds.
i finished the swim like this.
so now what do i do?
and so my journey now is to find some sort of grace in the face of this defeat.
and i can look at the journey, not just the destination.
i can stand here in front of you tonight and say i was courageous.
and with all sincerity, i can say, i am glad i lived those two years of my life that way, because my goal to not suffer regrets anymore, i got there with that goal.
and i want to live every day of the rest of my life that way, swim or no swim.
and i don't want to be the crazy woman who does it for years and years and years, and tries and fails and tries and fails and tries and fails, but i can swim from cuba to florida, and i will swim from cuba to florida.
are you going to swim the atlantic?
i have three more years than i thought.
it's perhaps easier now than ever before to make a good living.
i want to look now, if i may, at some of the reasons why we might be feeling anxiety about our careers.
one of the reasons why we might be suffering is that we are surrounded by snobs.
there is a real problem with snobbery.
because sometimes people from outside the u.k.
a snob is anybody who takes a small part of you and uses that to come to a complete vision of who you are.
and that's a lot of the reason why we care so much about our careers and indeed start caring so much about material goods.
there are other reasons -- there are other reasons why it's perhaps harder now to feel calm than ever before.
never before have expectations been so high about what human beings can achieve with their lifespan.
we are now in a system where anyone can rise to any position they please.
along with that is a kind of spirit of equality.
there is one really big problem with this, and that problem is envy.
even though she is much richer than any of you are.
and the consequences of this problem make themselves felt in bookshops.
and that makes failure seem much more crushing.
and some of the reason for that is that people take what happens to them extremely personally.
but they also own their failure.
i just want to turn to a few of them.
and he's going to do that on the day of judgment with angels and trumpets, and the skies will open.
that is an unknown part of them.
there is another source of solace and comfort for all this.
and then are fit for ridicule.
so i told them about othello.
they had not heard of it but were fascinated by it.
and i asked them to write the headline for the story of othello.
the other thing about modern society and why it causes this anxiety is that we have nothing at its center that is non-human.
we are the first society to be living in a world where we don't worship anything other than ourselves.
we like to feel in contact with something that is non-human, and that is so deeply important to us.
and one of the interesting things about success is that we think we know what it means.
if i said to you that there is somebody behind the screen who is very very successful, certain ideas would immediately come to mind.
i really want to be successful.
i think any wise life will accept, as i say, that there is going to be an element where we are not succeeding.
so what i want to argue for is not that we should give up on our ideas of success, but we should make sure that they are our own.
and make sure that we own them, that we are truly the authors of our own ambitions.
so we should do everything we can, we should do everything we can to pursue it.
but at the end of the day we should always remember that whoever is facing us, whatever has happened in their lives, there will be a strong element of the haphazard.
or do you think that you can't?
so, let me give you some examples of this to kind of make this much more concrete.
we're supposed to spend a third of our life in sleep.
because this is so much more sensitive.
you can put it on for two weeks and send it in the mail.
and you can see the ecg.
why has this all of a sudden become a reality, an exciting direction in the future of medicine?
and i want to just give you the results of that testing, because i wanted to understand about the consumer movement.
however you have to put in most of this stuff.
but it really wants you to enter all your activity.
how long did you do it for?"
so, i did this thing for seven days getting ready for tedmed.
of course how many here have any problems with sleeping?
okay, well this was a week of my life in sleeping, and you get a z.q.
and the wake time is in orange.
so, it also then tells you how you do compared to your age group.
and here is the latest map.
heart failure we already talked about.
there are two things that can really accelerate this whole process.
and i'd like to give it up for them for getting behind this.
over 80 major diseases have been cracked at the genomic level, but this is quite extraordinary: more has been learned about the underpinnings of disease in the last two and a half years than in the history of man.
each of these has a sensor.
and there was a little study about people who don't handshake, and comparing them with ones who do handshake.
well, the single best way is to get them to understand that what they're being told is a whole lot of nonsense.
and i think it should be about 100 million or maybe 500 million.
and then notice that a great many of these problems disappear.
or you throw it into the ocean and some fish will benefit from it.
you know you have 46 chromosomes.
and you have 46 people and you give them a scanner, or whatever you need, and they look at their chromosomes and each of them says which one he likes best, or she -- no reason to have just two sexes any more, even.
so each child has 46 parents, and i suppose you could let each group of 46 parents have 15 children.
the future must have some computers."
and you let a few million of them out at a time.
the plot of the book is that there's not enough diversity, so that the people who designed the city make sure that every now and then an entirely new person is created.
i think the big problem is that we're not smart enough to understand which of the problems we're facing are good enough.
so one thing we can do is live longer.
but lots of people now live to 90 or 100, unless they shake hands too much or something like that.
and in the case of the primates, we have almost the same genes.
and so it might be that if we just fix four or five genes, we can live 200 years.
like all this complaint about clones.
you become a monomaniac -- all you care about is not stepping out on that platform.
and i hope, in the next few years, to show that this will lead to smart machines.
this is a problem of such and such a type, and therefore there's a certain way or ways of thinking that are good for that problem.
but there's some things that have been going on since this idea of food was established.
none of the techniques that these people have developed over the course of the last 20 years is in any of those books.
in order to learn them, you have to go work in those restaurants.
is there a way we can show people food in a way they have not seen it before?
this is a picture called a cutaway.
this is actually the first picture i took in the book.
the idea here is to explain what happens when you steam broccoli.
and this magic view allows you to see all of what's happening while the broccoli steams.
then each of the different little pieces around it explain some fact.
one is you can actually explain what happens when you steam broccoli.
but we had a philosophy, which is it only has to look good for a thousandth of a second.
once you start cutting things in half, you kind of get carried away, so you see we cut the jars in half as well as the pan.
one of our philosophies in the book is that no dish is really intrinsically any better than any other dish.
and if you do lavish as much technique as possible, and you try to make the highest quality hamburger, it gets to be a little bit involved.
most of the time is kind of sitting there.
and it turns out, the best way to cut things in half is to actually cut them in half.
and so it showed up, we used it a little while, we cut it in half.
now you can also see a little bit how we did some of these shots.
and so those coals that kept falling off the edge, we kept having to put them back up.
what happens when you have your wok cut in half is the oil goes down into the fire and whoosh!
but to make them palatable, we cut it out of a steel plate and put it in front of a fire and photographed it like this.
we also did a lot of calculation.
now it may also be the last cookbook that ever does it.
you can do lots of market research and do focus groups and figure out what people really want, or you can just kind of go for it and make the book you want and hope other people like it.
if you really want great hamburger, it turns out it makes a difference if you align the grain.
we also have things about how to make the bun.
we have a very high-speed camera, which we had lots of fun with on the book.
we have a chapter on gels.
so in order to give you some kind of a perspective of where we are right now with surgical robots, and where we're going to be going in the future, i want to give you a little bit of perspective of how we got to this point, how we even came to believe that surgery was ok, that this was something that was possible to do, that this kind of cutting and reforming was ok.
but maybe if i cut a hole in his head i can fix it."
and so what we are seeing is evidence of a refined technique that was being handed down over thousands and thousands of years, all over the world.
now we can fast forward many thousands of years into the bronze age and beyond.
and so here you see him doing a lithotomy.
i mean who would put themselves through that?
and they came back to their american clinic and they said they had learned it was as important to wash your hands before doing surgery as it was to wash up afterwards.
these techniques were a lot harder to learn than people had anticipated.
they had to give up their wrists.
and one of the reasons why it is so hard is because the external ergonomics are terrible.
so what you need to do, to take the capability of your hand, and put it on the other side of that small incision, is you need to put a wrist on that instrument.
and the reason why this becomes so much easier is -- you can see on the bottom -- the hands are making the motions, and the instruments are following those motions exactly.
this is all done in between the ribs.
and cost is one of them.
but if you need to reach more places than just one, you need to move the robot.
and then you need to add some more ports, and more.
and for that reason there are many surgeries that just aren't being done with the da vinci.
what if we could change it so that we didn't have to re-set up each time we wanted to move somewhere different?
what if we could bring all the instruments in together in one place?
and how would that change the experience for the patient?
it has to be able to come off of the centerline and then be able to work back toward that centerline.
it's very exciting to think where we get to go with this.
we get to write the script of the next revolution in surgery.
as we take these capabilities, and we get to go to the next places, we get to decide what our new surgeries are going to be.
and i think to really get the rest of the way in that revolution, we need to not just take our hands in in new ways, we also need to take our eyes in in new ways.
we need to see beyond the surface.
we need to be able to guide what we're cutting in a much better way.
and we can take special cameras, and we can look at it.
and we can follow where they flow out from that tumor site, so we can see the first places where that cancer might travel.
and that is not the case.
and i would never want to deprive you of that epiphany.
and that is my vision for your future.
it was the early '90s, and i was at a public event.
i went to five countries around the world.
they do it to make a profit.
and i want to be very clear.
it's real slavery in exactly the same way that slavery would be recognized throughout all of human history.
now, how on earth did we get to a situation like this, where we have 27 million people in slavery in the year 2010?
if the rule of law is sound, it protects the poor and it protects the vulnerable.
they come into slavery because someone has asked them this question.
and they did exactly what you or i would do in the same situation.
i knew i had to do anything i could to earn some money to support the people i care about."
they climb into the back of the truck.
we really like the human being story a lot.
they are more expensive in places like north america.
these young boys are in nepal.
i've got to say, one of the most exciting parts about my job is that i get to, and i want to introduce you to one of those.
he was a slave child in ghana enslaved in the fishing industry, and he now, after escape and building a new life, has formed an organization that we work closely with to go back and get people out of slavery.
and in a way, without us even noticing, has ended up standing on the precipice of its own extinction, waiting for us to give it a big boot and knock it over.
we do not buy people out of slavery.
but most of the people in the world in slavery live in those places where the costs are lowest.
and the great thing about it is that it's not money down a hole, there is a freedom dividend.
when you let people out of slavery to work for themselves, are they motivated?
four million people were lifted up out of slavery and then dumped.
we have made a commitment that we will never let people come out of slavery on our watch, and end up as second class citizens.
they had just begun to come out of a hereditary kind of slavery.
how could we not succeed," she said, "when people like you from the other side of the world are coming here to stand beside us?"
okay, we have to ask ourselves, are we willing to live in a world with slavery?
if we don't take action, we just leave ourselves open to have someone else jerk the strings that tie us to slavery in the products we buy, and in our government policies.
i think there is enough intellectual power in this room to bring slavery to an end.
and they were a lot of fun.
but when i speak of him, i'm really speaking of both of them as a team.
so he would be 100 this june.
we have a lot of cool celebrations that we're going to do.
but we're going to first enter through the door of the big top.
there is a picture of charles.
it is rough and it is flat.
too much rain falls on some areas, and not enough on others.
but people live on this land.
here is something of the way they live.
it was on seven screens and it was 200 feet across.
and you can imagine, and the thing about it is, that they believed that the human mind could handle this number of images because the important thing was to get the gestalt of what the images were about.
so that was just a little snip.
they were always trying things out.
it's about getting that music thing going through their heads and their thinking.
and this is a model that they did of that seven-screen presentation.
so now we're going to go through that door of furniture.
but these are ones i think are really cool.
it's just the things you try out to kind of make it work better.
and you know some of them would probably be terrible chairs.
some of them are kind of cool looking.
i think it may be a real common ground as we kind of figure out what on earth to do in the next 20 or 30 years.
the other thing that's kind of cool is that you look at this and in the media when people say design, they actually mean style.
but you know the object is just a pivot.
they were always trying to make thing better and better.
this is something called a splint.
these form part of a grouping system much as the stars do.
they are so many and so varied that from this distance they appear like the stars from earth.
i want to give you one example.
and i think part of that is that they never delegated understanding.
and i think in our family we were very lucky, because we learned about design backwards.
it was part of the business of life in general.
it was part of the quality of life.
and here is some family pictures.
this is a letter that my grandfather sent to my mom when she was five years old.
well is there another name for a sunrise?
and there are a lot of fun things.
but now i'm going to return you to the real world.
cranbrook is very generous to let us show it for the first time here.
you want to learn how to make films?
it was always part of how they looked at the world.
and a little bit higher, why they have a glaze on a thing they call a thali.
and then things get to be a little questionable.
and there is solid silver thalis.
but you can go beyond that.
and i also want to share this one.
and it's kind of cool for me to be part of a family and a tradition where he was talking about that in 1978.
and part of why this stuff is important and all the things that we do are important, is that these are the ideas we need.
i really thank you for your time.
and the object that was levitating here is called a superconductor.
and let me show you how this works.
and when i place it on top of a regular magnet, it just stays locked in midair.
if we look around us, much of what surrounds us started life as various rocks and sludge buried in the ground in various places in the world.
and so this magical transformation is what i was trying to get at with my project, which became known as the toaster project.
i didn't have the rest of my life to do this project.
can i come up and get some iron?"
he had misheard me and thought i was coming up because i was trying to make a poster, and so wasn't prepared to take me into the mines.
so i ended up going to the history of science library and looking at this book.
and so this is after a day and about half a night smelting this iron.
again, this mine was once the largest copper mine in the world.
so i looked at other ways of making plastic.
and for a while that was looking really good.
and it was looking good for a while, but i left it outside, because you had to leave it outside to dry, and unfortunately i came back and there were snails eating the unhydrolyzed bits of potato.
so kind of out of desperation, i decided that i could think laterally.
and that was brought into force to try and deal with the mountain of stuff that is just being made and then living for a while in our homes and then going to landfill.
and there it is on the shelves.
when i was a student at mit, we all shared one computer that took up a whole building.
and we're going to do it again in the next 25 years.
but we more than make up for that.
we actually ship more than twice as much of every form of information technology.
this is a completely different example.
the cost has come down by half every year.
but that was really right on schedule.
but where will we get the software?
but we are learning more and more about the human brain.
and there is 10 thousand times more sunlight than we need.
what used to take up a building now fits in our pockets.
and we will begin to actually deeply influence our health and our intelligence, as we get closer and closer to this technology.
but this is being announced today.
this is an exciting new venture.
and we invite you to participate.
some children jumped down and ran to the rock pools with bags.
they were trying to catch fish.
no one realized that this was a very bad idea.
the water had started coming back.
it was foaming over the reef.
but the water continued to climb.
he said he'd lived his whole life there by the beach, and that he would rather die there than run.
a boy broke away from his mother to run back into his house to get his dog, who was apparently afraid.
an old lady, crying, was carried out of her house and up the road by her son.
but they had not had any time to evacuate any belongings.
for hours afterwards, the sea was strewn with bits of wood for miles around -- all of this was from the houses in the slum.
when the waters subsided, it was as if it had never existed.
you don't even know if it is safe to go back down to the water, to catch a boat to the hospital.
having this news was comforting in some small way to understand what had just happened to us.
what became very clear was that, within a few days, the outpouring of information was immense, and we got a complete and powerful picture of what had happened in a way that we never had been able to get before.
and i want to ask three questions in this talk, in the 10 minutes that remain, about the blogosphere.
they are not getting paid for it in any way other than in the attention and, to some extent, the reputational capital that they gain from doing a good job.
the simplest example of this is if you ask a group of people to do something like guess how many jellybeans are in a jar.
it's a very challenging idea to anyone who has invested an enormous amount of time and expertise, and who has a lot of energy invested in the notion that he or she knows better than everyone else.
but there is a dark side to this, and that's what i want to spend the last part of my talk on.
one of the things that happens if you spend a lot of time on the internet, and you spend a lot of time thinking about the internet, is that it is very easy to fall in love with the internet.
and much of the time it is.
it is something more than that.
but the problem is that groups are only smart when the people in them are as independent as possible.
a lot of people talk about ants.
so, the ant colony is a great model: you have all these little parts that collectively add up to a great thing.
and they deserve more than that."
he sat at a table with seven or eight of these other guys.
said he was lucky, because he had his good arm, and then he pushed himself back from the table.
but understand what you're looking at we made small enough to fit on a 50th percentile female, so that we could put it in any of these people.
can we look at this thing?
and we do something different than what we did in the past; we add kind of a modicum of intelligence to that.
you can have 100 million families, or take things out of the suburbs, because these are homes that are a part of the environment.
we had a big show in prague, and we decided to put it in front of the cathedral so religion can confront the house of meat.
what have i heard during these last four days?
this is my third visit to ted.
and the only explanation i can have for some of what you've been hearing in the last four days is that it arises, in fact, out of a form of love.
if there are 15 operations, you know that none of them work.
they all come down to the idea of an expectation of something good that is due to happen.
and you know what i found out?
i wasn't sure i heard it right, so i found him in one of the inter-sessions.
do you know what the world will be saved by?
what i mean is this ability that each of us has to be something greater than herself or himself; to arise out of our ordinary selves and achieve something that at the beginning we thought perhaps we were not capable of.
some of you have felt it in laboratories; some of you have felt it at the workbench.
and i think that it's going to be, in time, the elements of the human spirit that we've been hearing about bit by bit by bit from so many of the speakers in the last few days.
he must see himself and the world through the eyes of another, and of many others.
what is it that they have every right to ask of us?
what is it that we have every right to ask of ourselves, out of our shared humanity and out of the human spirit?
there has certainly been no argument about that in this room in the past four days.
and we have had examples over and over and over again -- you've just heard one in the last 15 minutes -- of people who have not only had that commitment, but had the charisma, the brilliance -- and i think in this room it's easy to use the word brilliant, my god -- the brilliance to succeed at least at the beginning of their quest, and who no doubt will continue to succeed, as long as more and more of us enlist ourselves in their cause.
and in neuroscience, we have to deal with many difficult questions about the brain.
but i want to start with the easiest question and the question you really should have all asked yourselves at some point in your life, because it's a fundamental question if we want to understand brain function.
and that is, why do we and other animals have brains?
there is no other reason to have a brain.
but we can look at how well we're doing by thinking about how well we're doing building machines which can do what humans can do.
how well are we doing determining what piece to move where?
and i think if ibm's deep blue played anyone in this room, it would win every time.
now why is that top problem so easy and the bottom problem so hard?
one reason is a very smart five year-old could tell you the algorithm for that top problem -- look at all possible moves to the end of the game and choose the one that makes you win.
so this is the end of a ph.d.
and the student has trained this robot to pour this water into a glass.
and this is her getting the world record in real time.
and it sounds like an easy problem.
and what bayes' rule says is that i should multiply the numbers on the red by the numbers on the green to get the numbers of the yellow, which have the ellipses, and that's my belief.
now i wouldn't tell you all this if it wasn't that a few years ago, we showed this is exactly what people do when they learn new movement skills.
now a key part to the bayesian is this part of the formula.
so that really means i have to make predictions of the future.
but you can imagine looking inside the brain.
well why would i bother doing that?
and so we decided the most obvious place to start was with tickling.
and we replay that to the other hand with a time delay.
so the important point here is the right hand always does the same things -- sinusoidal movement.
the left hand always is the same and puts sinusoidal tickle.
and one thing you notice about children in backseats of cars on long journeys, they get into fights -- which started with one of them doing something to the other, the other retaliating.
now when i screamed at my children to stop, sometimes they would both say to me the other person hit them harder.
so they actually think they've hit the person less hard than they have -- rather like the tickling.
so we decided to test this in the lab.
and so they take it in turns to apply the force they've just experienced back and forward.
so think about just a point to point movement.
and i can hold my arm in a particular joint configuration either very stiff or very relaxed.
so i have a huge amount of choice to make.
so why is it that we move the particular ways we do?
and maybe those who move better than others have got more chance of getting their children into the next generation.
so what is it about a movement which is good or bad?
so if i pick the same command through many times, i will get a different noisy version each time, because noise changes each time.
all we can be sure of is the variability will be different.
if i move in this particular way, i end up with a smaller variability across many movements.
so if i have to choose between those two, i would choose the right one because it's less variable.
and one intuition to get is actually the amount of noise or variability i show here gets bigger as the force gets bigger.
so you want to avoid big forces as one principle.
does that mean that you think that the other things we think our brains are about -- the dreaming, the yearning, the falling in love and all these things -- are a kind of side show, an accident?
you have to study vision with the realization of how the movement system is going to use vision.
and it uses it very differently once you think about it that way.
and the dark ages are the time between when you put away the lego for the last time as a kid, and you decide as an adult that it is okay to play with a kid's toy.
where am i going to put all this?"
so then you realize there are these conventions.
and then some of the designs that people do they actually sell in the store.
i have to take a moment.
this is amazing what you can do.
i was afraid a car was going to come smash it as i was taking a picture for you guys.
he makes the case for going back to mars to find out more.
we know a lot about mars.
this is bigger than the state of arizona.
this is from spirit and opportunity.
water is important because if you want life you have to have water.
this was just taken a few weeks ago.
it has not been seen publicly.
and you can see there are three distinct regions of methane.
we asked this question 10 years ago.
and we spent two days deciding how to best answer this question.
we fly about a mile above the surface.
how do we get it to mars?
and we have it in something called an aeroshell.
this is how we do it.
this is the spacecraft taking nine months to get to mars.
how do we know we can do it?
and i want to show you one of our tests.
so, we went around the table to talk about what we should do.
all the eyes turned to me.
and so, i want to tell you about what we've learned in doing that and four lessons i've learned in the last year.
it does seem really hard to get consumers to do the right thing.
those of us who care about all this would act better if we knew what the real costs were.
who would have thought that the ethanol biofuel miracle would come from a developing country in south america?
and who would have thought that all that is not enough?
it is the mother of all markets.
everyone here cares about changing the world and has made a difference in that one way or another.
it could be bigger than wal-mart.
so one of the first things we thought we would tackle would be how we go about predicting epidemics.
but what i'd like to show you today is a means by which we might get not just rapid warning about an epidemic, but also actually early detection of an epidemic.
so if you look at this, you might immediately grasp that different people have different numbers of connections.
now, who would you rather be if a juicy piece of gossip were spreading through the network?
and in fact, if you could do that, what you would see is something like this.
your friends have more friends than you do, and this is known as the friendship paradox.
and the difference in the two is 16 days.
or you could see the first time the two curves diverged, as shown on the left.
i should say that how far advanced a notice one might get about something depends on a host of factors.
so bigger dots mean more of your friends have the flu.
and all this administrative data can be pulled together and processed to understand human behavior in a way we never could before.
and with this science, we can understand how exactly the whole comes to be greater than the sum of its parts.
it's about a little boy whose father was a history buff and who used to take him by the hand to visit the ruins of an ancient metropolis on the outskirts of their camp.
they would always stop by to visit these huge winged bulls that used to guard the gates of that ancient metropolis, and the boy used to be scared of these winged bulls, but at the same time they excited him.
and the dad used to use those bulls to tell the boy stories about that civilization and their work.
let me show you how it works.
all of this happens in seconds.
these babies would be producing something like ten thousand points a second.
they were gone in an instant.
the results of our work in the field are used to produce media and deliverables to be used by conservators and researchers.
and so this is not a video.
the more i got involved in the heritage field, the more it became clear to me that we are losing the sites and the stories faster than we can physically preserve them.
imagine us as a human race not knowing where we came from.
let me close with another short story.
let me leave you with a final thought.
we owe it to our children, our grandchildren and the generations we will never meet to keep it safe and to pass it along.
the two wizards that i have that are behind the curtain will help me bring the results on the screen.
this is all in 3d and of course you can fly through the cloud of points.
you can look at it from on top, from the ceiling.
it was in the paper -- not on the front page.
and the reason i give you this moment is there's a deep truth in it.
now, other countries have their own reasons for not wanting to get involved.
he joined at the age of 21.
so then you have to make the decision.
he has to make all these judgments.
so sergio -- this receptacle of all of this learning on how to deal with evil and how to deal with brokenness, lay under the rubble for three and a half hours without rescue.
one of them had been at 9/11 and lost his buddies on september 11th, and yet went in and risked his life in order to save sergio.
but it was too late for sergio.
i want to wrap up, but i want to close with what i take to be the four lessons from sergio's life on this question of how do we prevent evil from prevailing, which is how i would have framed the question.
he had a lot of flaws, but he was very adaptive.
i think that was his greatest quality.
and they would laugh at him because he didn't have the power of states, the power of any military or police.
i will try to make it such, but i will never use that word again.
but by the end of his life, i think he had struck a balance that we as a country can learn from.
all the great progress in this country with relation to our adversaries has come by going into the room.
you can actually do far more to build an international coalition against a harmdoer or a wrongdoer by being in the room and showing to the rest of the world that that person, that regime, is the problem and that you, the united states, are not the problem.
he talked a lot about freedom from fear.
and i recognize there is so much to be afraid of.
and i found myself in the places where people are fighting every day to survive and can't even obtain a meal.
this red cup comes from rwanda from a child named fabian.
because one cup of food a day changes fabian's life completely.
but what i'd like to talk about today is the fact that this morning, about a billion people on earth -- or one out of every seven -- woke up and didn't even know how to fill this cup.
one out of every seven people.
will we be able to feed a population that will be nine billion in just a few decades?
this is jobs and opportunity all the way up and down the value chain.
but i actually came to this issue in a different way.
this is a picture of me and my three children.
in 1987, i was a new mother with my first child and was holding her and feeding her when an image very similar to this came on the television.
and this was yet another famine in ethiopia.
one two years earlier had killed more than a million people.
but it never struck me as it did that moment, because on that image was a woman trying to nurse her baby, and she had no milk to nurse.
and it was at that moment that i just was filled with the challenge and the outrage that actually we know how to fix this problem.
and i was just struck that this is out of place.
in fact, what we know now is that every 10 seconds we lose a child to hunger.
and i also want to talk about what i call our new burden of knowledge.
you may be surprised to know that a child could be saved every 22 seconds if there was breastfeeding in the first six months of life.
and so today we focus on not just passing out food, but making sure the mothers have enough enrichment, and teaching them about breastfeeding.
do you think you could go to the store and get a choice of power bars, like we can, and pick the right one to match?
well i find parents out on the front lines very aware their children are going down for the count.
and i go to those shops, if there are any, or out to the fields to see what they can get, and they cannot obtain the nutrition.
the next thing i want to talk about is school feeding.
what we have found working with the world bank is that the poor man's safety net, the best investment, is school feeding.
many kids in the world can't go to school because they have to go beg and find a meal.
food aid coming in every year when people are starving during the lean seasons.
i love this idea that came from the village level: three keys to unlock that warehouse.
we certainly saw that in 2008.
and the women can go in and swipe and get nine food items.
perhaps most exciting to me is an idea that bill gates, howard buffett and others have supported boldly, which is to ask the question: what if, instead of looking at the hungry as victims -- and most of them are small farmers who cannot raise enough food or sell food to even support their own families -- what if we view them as the solution, as the value chain to fight hunger?
and they require that a third of that food come from the smallest farmers who would have no opportunity.
and the fact that france has put food at the center of the g20 is really important.
wfp's been able to leave 30 nations because they have transformed the face of hunger in their nations.
what i would like to offer here is a challenge.
i believe we're living at a time in human history where it's just simply unacceptable that children wake up and don't know where to find a cup of food.
i am so honored to be here with some of the world's top innovators and thinkers.
and i would like you to join with all of humanity to draw a line in the sand and say, "no more.
no more are we going to accept this."
and we want to tell our grandchildren that there was a terrible time in history where up to a third of the children had brains and bodies that were stunted, but that exists no more.
it is the only way you can start to fight cancer, is by catching it early.
we could do the same in cancer.
why is it a disease of the aged?
why is it hard to treat?
the goal of me as a cancer doctor is not to understand cancer.
the goal is to control cancer.
we need to take a step back."
and he was saying: does he really want to meet another doctor?
and i'll show you some data there where i really think it can make a difference and a new way to approach it.
most of that state is hidden.
you can try to control them without that fundamental understanding of every component.
we have no idea the mechanism.
we can start to see that system.
and so what this is, is we're taking a cross-section of her body here, and you can see in the middle there is her heart, and to the side of her heart on the left there is this large tumor that will invade and will kill her, untreated, in a matter of weeks.
and we learned something important there.
they had to give it also in the u.s.
but they did that, and what they found is that 70 percent of the non-responders lived much longer and did better than people who got placebo.
we can start to look at different components along this spectrum.
and i think one of the exciting things that is starting to happen now is that people from those fields are coming in.
let me start with the observation that most of the sound around us is accidental, and much of it is unpleasant.
music is the most powerful form of sound that we know that affects our emotional state.
this is guaranteed to make most of you feel pretty sad if i leave it on.
natural sound can do that too.
there is a reason for that.
you can't understand two people talking at once or in this case one person talking twice.
try and listen to the other one.
for those of you who are retailers, you may want to look away before i show this slide.
they are losing up to 30 percent of their business with people leaving shops faster, or just turning around on the door.
we all have done it, leaving the area because the sound in there is so dreadful.
most of you recognize that immediately.
and most of you associate that with something!
i hope that's going to change over the next few years.
give people something with the sound.
it can be a bit like a bowl of spaghetti: sometimes you just have to eat it and see what happens.
so i hope this talk has raised sound in your consciousness.
if we all do that we move to a state that i like to think will be sound living in the world.
i'm going to leave you with a little bit more birdsong.
i grew up watching star trek.
and what i do is i study insects.
the fly is going to sense this predator.
they have another set of eyes on the top of their head.
we have no idea what they do.
they can even taste with their wings.
when we think of brain, we of course imagine our own brain.
and then something happened when i started to work on flies.
so i want you to look at the payload at the tail of the fruit fly.
this animal gets rid of them because they take up too much space.
how can you make a small number of neurons do a lot?
the first is, it's essential for us to understand the human brain if we do want to get along in society, and i think that it is a key step in evolution.
i think that we can come up with very concrete solutions on how to treat disorders.
and what that illustrates is that decisions are the key things that support our perceptual bubble.
99 percent of what you see is not what comes in through the eyes.
is it capable of doing it?
but the real big step was the neocortex.
they were so successful in evolution that what we did was to duplicate them over and over and add more and more of them to the brain until we ran out of space in the skull.
but you can also understand that if you have a disease within one of these columns, the note is going to be off.
how many trees does it have?
what is the pattern of the carpet?
and you may have more or less neurons.
we can look at the fabric.
we can use less or more of them.
but to do it, what you have to do is you have to make this come alive.
we make it come alive with equations, a lot of mathematics.
but what you do need is a very big computer.
and in fact you need one laptop to do all the calculations just for one neuron.
and this gives the first glimpse of what is happening in your brain when there is a stimulation.
where is it inside the neocortex?
and if you do that, you will be able to step inside the reality that is created by this machine, by this piece of the brain.
there is a lot more to do to test these theories, and to test any other theories.
but i hope that you are at least partly convinced that it is not impossible to build a brain.
it began a little less than two years ago.
but if i'm going to continue doing these adventures, there has to be a reason for me to do them beyond just getting there.
young people would ask the most amazing questions.
we slept in a tent that was very low to the ground, because the winds on antarctica were so extreme, it would blow anything else away.
how many batteries do you carry for all the equipment that you have?
the stories we were hearing got us to the south pole.
we arrived at the south pole.
we looked at each other with these looks of disbelief at what we had just completed.
health to the ocean means health for us.
i heard astronaut joe allen explain how he had to learn everything he could about his life support system and then do everything he could to take care of his life support system; and then he pointed to this and he said, "life support system."
we need to learn everything we can about it and do everything we can to take care of it.
i gave a talk not so long ago at the world bank and i showed this amazing image of earth and i said, "there it is!
no matter where on earth you live.
but first we have to know.
these are the gentle giants that i've had the pleasure of meeting face to face many times underwater.
we can now go to the arctic.
just ten years ago i stood on the ice at the north pole.
all of these parts are part of our life support system.
this is the consequence of not knowing that there are limits to what we can take out of the sea.
there are still some blue whales.
imagine what that means to our life support system.
the good news is that there are now more than 4,000 places in the sea, around the world, that have some kind of protection.
the bad news is that you have to look hard to find them.
there are still places in the sea as pristine as i knew as a child.
the next 10 years may be the most important, and the next 10,000 years the best chance our species will have to protect what remains of the natural systems that give us life.
we need many things to keep and maintain the world as a better place.
but, nothing else will matter if we fail to protect the ocean.
we need to do for the ocean what al gore did for the skies above.
and so, i suppose you want to know what my wish is.
you decide: how much of your heart do you want to protect?
and one of the people who worked on it in the beginning was my father, freeman, there in the middle.
so we had a few kayaks.
but all the time i was out there doing these strange kayak voyages in odd, beautiful parts of this planet, i always thought in the back of my mind about project orion, and how my father and his friends were going to build these big ships.
they were really going to go, they were actually going to go.
my father was not going to take his children; that was one of the reasons we sort of had a falling out for a few years.
these are the statistics of what would be the good places to go and stop.
the people who supported it were the air force, which meant that it was all secret.
the air force started to build smaller models and actually started doing this.
but no children were allowed; my dad could tell me he was building a spaceship and going to go to saturn, but he could not say anything more about it.
you know, it was going to be a nice long trip.
all i can say in closing is, we heard yesterday that one of the 10 bad things that could happen to us is an asteroid with our name on it.
and one of the bad things that could happen to nasa is if that asteroid shows up with our name on it nine months out and everybody says, "well, what are we going to do?"
so i'm going to tell you the good news and the bad news.
so i decided to try and write something more fun.
and i came up with an idea that i will write a cookbook.
and it was going to be a look at life through the kitchen.
and i was quite excited about this.
i was going to talk a little bit about research, a little bit about the kitchen.
if you really want to do it you have to do it."
i do this all day long.
i want to write something else.
so i wrote a book on my research.
and it turned out to be quite fun in two ways.
but the more interesting thing was that i started learning from people.
which i think is just fascinating.
so think about these two tables.
and you must have seen this illusion.
and there is almost nothing we can do about it, aside from taking a ruler and starting to measure it.
what do you see the color that top arrow is pointing to?
and if i cover the rest of the cube you can see that they are identical.
there is no way for us not to see this illusion.
vision is one of the best things we do.
we do more vision more hours of the day than we do anything else.
and the argument is in those cases it might be the issue that we actually make many more mistakes and, worse, not have an easy way to see them.
and these are different countries in europe.
why do some countries give a lot and some countries give a little?
when you ask people this question, they usually think that it has to be something about culture.
how much do you care about people?
or maybe it is about religion.
but it turns out that from organ donation they are very different.
but whatever the countries on the right are doing they are doing a much better job than begging.
turns out the secret has to do with a form at the dmv.
the countries on the left have a form at the dmv that looks something like this.
now think about what this means.
we wake up in the morning and we feel we make decisions.
we wake up in the morning and we open the closet and we feel that we decide what to wear.
and we open the refrigerator and we feel that we decide what to eat.
what this is actually saying is that much of these decisions are not residing within us.
when you walk into the dmv, the person who designed the form will have a huge influence on what you'll end up doing.
but when it comes to us, we have such a feeling that we are at the driver's seat, we have such a feeling that we are in control, and we are making the decision, that it's very hard to even accept the idea that we actually have an illusion of making a decision, rather than an actual decision.
in fact, by definition, these are decisions about something that will happen to us after we die.
how could we care about something less than something that happens after we die?
and because we have no idea what to do we just pick whatever it was that was chosen for us.
and they presented to them a case study of a patient.
and then they said to the physician, "you decided a few weeks ago that nothing is working for this patient.
so the patient is on a path to have his hip replaced.
do you pull the patient back and try ibuprofen?
well the good news is that most physicians in this case decided to pull the patient and try the ibuprofen.
and if you pull them back do you try ibuprofen or piroxicam?
this decision makes it as easy to let the patient continue with hip replacement.
i hope this worries you, by the way -- when you go to see your physician.
but the moment you set this as the default it has a huge power over whatever people end up doing.
imagine i give you a choice.
now imagine i added a choice to the set that nobody wanted.
but what if the option to have your car stolen was not exactly like this.
if you want coffee you have to pay for it yourself.
here are two examples of this principle.
this was an ad from the economist a few years ago that gave us three choices.
or you could get both for 125.
now i looked at this and i called up the economist.
and they passed me from one person to another to another, until eventually i got to a person who was in charge of the website.
so i decided to do the experiment that i would have loved the economist to do with me.
i took this and i gave it to 100 mit students.
that means our students can read.
i gave it to another 100 students.
but it wasn't useless in the sense that it helped people figure out what they wanted.
i showed some people a picture of tom, and a picture of jerry.
but for half the people i added an ugly version of jerry.
this of course has two very clear implications for life in general.
if you ever go bar hopping, who do you want to take with you?
the general point is that when we think about economics we have this beautiful view of human nature.
but there is a silver lining.
when it comes to building the physical world, we kind of understand our limitations.
and we build these things that not everybody can use obviously.
we use it in our everyday lives now -- in our private lives, in our business lives.
so these are the main four issues.
can we use them for communications?
what do we need to do?
and then what we have here is a little hole.
and the light goes through that hole.
in the future we hope that we can integrate this little hole into these smart phones.
this is a smart academic doing a little bit of tricks here."
and you see, even light from the ceiling comes down here to the receiver.
you will agree with me that we have lights in the hospital.
you need to see what to do.
you have lights in an aircraft.
so no one, if i have a light here, if i have secure data, no one on the other side of this room through that wall would be able to read that data.
now we can in fact see where the data is going to.
but i can give you a few examples.
and that moved us to the next level.
have you thought about it lately?
and one thing that is common to all of life is dna.
and look at all the complex things and wonderful things we've been able to create with just a one and a zero.
and they mix up in all different fashions, and that makes you a human being.
we are starting to understand that.
what are the exact instructions that are making it do that?
you might also be interested in knowing that a mouse has about the same amount of genes.
and what that means is, you are going to walk around with your own personal genome on a smart card.
you will give your genome to the pharmacist, and your drug will be made for you and it will work much better than the ones that were -- you won't have side effects.
if you saw the genome for a mouse or for a human it would look no different than this, but what scientists are doing now is they're understanding what these do and what they mean.
for my wife: eat three times as much and you never put on any weight.
some people will find very scary.
you can find out where your relatives come from; you can do your genealogy going back thousands of years.
an architect far better and smarter than us has given us that toolbox, and we now have the ability to use it.
we are now not just reading genomes; we are writing them.
well, one thing you could do is what some people might call franken-noir.
we can build a better vine.
and then we understand what is terroir.
i told you i'm going to make some of you puke.
there also is a set of rules.
nature has put a set of rules out there.
and all i can tell you is, stay healthy for 20 years.
and then number three, now we can punish the dog for breaking rules he didn't even know existed.
his only crime is he grew.
and the reason is built into their behavior -- is to always come back and apologize.
and then we give him a reason for sitting.
the dog lives with you, the dog can get you any time.
so the second stage in training is to teach the dog to want to do what we want him to do, and this is very easy.
so now all of these distractions that worked against training now become rewards that work for training.
all i have to do is sit, and they do everything.
people here get very confused about what a punishment is.
they think a punishment is something nasty.
i was working with a very dangerous dog about a year ago.
and i only agreed to work with it if they promised it would stay in their house, and they never took it outside.
the dog is actually euthanized now, but this was a dog i worked with for a while.
a lot of the aggression happened around the kitchen, so while i was there -- this was on the fourth visit -- we did a four and a half hour down-stay, with the dog on his mat.
the behavior problem was going away.
but for me, the reason for this actually has to do with dogs.
not just with their puppy, but with the rest of the family at class.
i mean, who in their right mind would think that a dog would want to approach them when they're screaming like that?
that child has lost everything -- that one of the two people he can trust in this world has absolutely pulled the rug from under his feet.
i walked to the back of the plane, i sat down, and a thought came to me.
if that had been a dog, i would have laid him out.
no different from the dog barking.
you see it especially in the workplace, especially from boss to employee.
i don't understand a thing about it now, but i could do it as a kid.
that is such a powerful training technique.
this should be taught in schools.
how you do negotiate with your friend who wants your toy?
how on earth about raising children?
the first is what i like to call a hyper-rational process.
and what we saw were buildings that were very generic.
and then we started making new decisions.
the reading room should be able to see the water.
to give you some sense of the power of this idea, the biggest block is what we call the book spiral.
it just so happens to be in the sixth through 10th floor of the building, but that is not necessarily an expensive approach.
and so this was the final operation, which was to take these blocks as they were all pushed off kilter, and to hold onto them with a skin.
this is going into one of the entries.
this is actually a program that we invented with the library.
there are plenty of shopping malls that allow you to get out of the rain in downtown seattle, but there are not so many free places that allow you to get out of the rain.
this is actually the place that we put into the building so i could propose to my wife.
i can show this to you later.
and so instead of being a developer that sees an opportunity to make money, they saw an ability to be a catalyst in their downtown.
and it also charged us with thinking about how to have something that was both a single building and a credible sort of sub-building.
finish the cores, finish the meat and you get something that looks like this.
i want to debut a new song that i've been working on in the last five or six months.
there seems to be a rule in nature that if you get too close to where you came from, it gets ugly.
so that's getting a little more closer to a personal experience.
can we have the next slide?
wk: i think it will produce more than 20 the watts.
and so you're talking to people here at ted to get people who might be able to help in some way to realize this dream?
thank you so much for coming.
daniel tammet: different ways of knowing
very often when i meet someone and they learn this about me, there's a certain kind of awkwardness.
i can see it in their eyes.
they want to ask me something.
or they mention cube roots or ask me to recite a long number or long text.
rather than try to figure them out, i'm going to ask you to consider for a moment the intuitions and the gut instincts that are going through your head and your heart as you look at them.
or look at the foreign word and the sounds: can you get a sense of the range of meanings that it's pointing you towards?
here are the numbers one to 12 as i see them -- every number with its own shape and character.
one is a flash of white light.
and here is one of my paintings.
and you can see here how my perception of the sound l helps the alliteration to jump right out.
so that gives us a form that we can picture, that we can perceive.
well if 100, if we think of 100 as being like a square, 75 would look like this.
so what we need to do now is put those two pictures together in our mind -- something like this.
it can also mean the fibers that grow from a head.
so in these few minutes, i hope i've been able to share a little bit of my vision of things and to show you that words can have colors and emotions, numbers, shapes and personalities.
i hope that i've given you the desire to learn to see the world with new eyes.
when i was a student here in oxford in the 1970s, the future of the world was bleak.
the desert was advancing by a mile or two a year.
and all this at a time when the population has doubled.
how did we become the only species that becomes more prosperous as it becomes more populous?
in other words, you need to understand how ideas have sex.
i want you to imagine how we got from making objects like this to making objects like this.
it just tells you they were both designed to fit the human hand.
and there's another difference too, which is the object on the left is made from one substance.
and i think the answer is exchange, the habit of exchanging one thing for another.
you can have culture without exchange.
they teach each other traditions which are handed down from parent to offspring.
adam takes four hours to make a spear and three hours to make an axe.
oz takes one hour to make a spear and two hours to make an axe.
he can make his own spears and axes.
well no, because if you think about it, if oz makes two spears and adam make two axes, and then they trade, then they will each have saved an hour of work.
and the more they do this, the more true it's going to be, because the more they do this, the better adam is going to get at making axes and the better oz is going to get at making spears.
ask yourself how long you would have to work to provide for yourself an hour of reading light this evening to read a book by.
you get the fat out of it.
how long is it going to take you?
and the answer is about half a second.
and back in 1880, it would have been 15 minutes to earn that amount of light on the average wage.
but the object on the right was made for me by other people.
now, you do get other animals working for each other too.
so when did this habit start?
and how long has it been going on?
it just looks like the first thing we did was work male for female and female for male.
and the beauty of this system is that it benefits both sides.
all he has to do is make sure that when he kills a warthog it's big enough to share some.
exchange between groups has been going on for a hundred thousand years.
and that will have led to specialization.
what happens when you cut people off from exchange, from the ability to exchange and specialize?
and the answer is that not only do you slow down technological progress, you can actually throw it into reverse.
how many of the things in our pockets could we continue to make after 10,000 years?
go back to this image again and ask yourself, not only who made it and for who, but who knew how to make it.
in the case of the stone axe, the man who made it knew how to make it.
he just knows how to run a company.
we all know little bits, but none of us knows the whole.
with language we have to transfer ideas that we understand with each other.
but with technology, we can actually do things that are beyond our capabilities.
and so took this first example, which is called coxsackievirus, and just break it into small windows.
there are a ton of viruses.
so how do we deal with this?
you have no idea what walks in through the door.
so, how about the people who walk in off the street?
and what are we using it for?
and this is what this looks like.
is it really in the tissue?
and it might have nothing to do with cancer.
and at the time i didn't think much about it, but then later, i realized that that was the high point of my education.
people call me a game designer, but i really think of these things more as toys.
but i started getting very interested in maria montessori and her methods, and the way she went about things, and the way she thought it very valuable for kids to kind of discover things on their own rather than being taught these things overtly.
and it kind of led me to astrobiology, which is the study of possible life in the universe.
even if it wasn't as pretty as what other people would make it -- as a professional artist would make for games -- it really stuck with them and they really cared about what would happen to it.
so it has a little spine.
we have parts here that i can put on or pull off.
it will actually bring it to life.
and i can see how it might dance.
so at any rate, then i bring this back into the game.
so this is the planet that we've been playing on up to this point in the game.
what might they learn on this?
so here's a little city with some of our guys kind of walking around in it.
i can also play with the dynamics of this world over time.
now over time, this is actually going to heat up the planet.
one of the things that always frustrated me a little bit about astronomy when i was a kid is how it was always presented so two-dimensionally and so static.
but these are the things that we can kind of put in this little galaxy here.
so we're flying over here to what looks like a black hole.
but we also have stars and things as well.
you might be a vengeful god and going out and conquesting, because you actually can do that, you can go in and attack other intelligent races.
because i think most of the problems that our world is facing right now is the result of short-term thinking, and the fact that it is so hard for us to think 50, 100, or 1,000 years out.
body language affects how others see us, but it may also change how we see ourselves.
so i want to start by offering you a free no-tech life hack, and all it requires of you is this: that you change your posture for two minutes.
but before i give it away, i want to ask you to right now do a little audit of your body and what you're doing with your body.
so how many of you are sort of making yourselves smaller?
sometimes we hold onto our arms like this.
so i want you to pay attention to what you're doing right now.
and there's a lot of reason to believe that this is a valid way to look at this.
so it doesn't have to do so much with whether or not that physician was incompetent, but do we like that person and how they interacted?
so when we think of nonverbals, we think of how we judge others, how they judge us and what the outcomes are.
we are also influenced by our nonverbals, our thoughts and our feelings and our physiology.
and this is true across the animal kingdom.
and humans do the same thing.
she shows that people who are born with sight and people who are congenitally blind do this when they win at a physical competition.
what do we do when we feel powerless?
and this is what happens when you put together high and low power.
so you have people who are like caricatures of alphas, really coming into the room, they get right into the middle of the room before class even starts, like they really want to occupy space.
they raise their hands like this.
you see it on their faces and their bodies, and they sit in their chair and they make themselves tiny, and they go like this when they raise their hand.
so women are much more likely to do this kind of thing than men.
but the other thing i noticed is that it also seemed to be related to the extent to which the students were participating, and how well they were participating.
is it possible that we could get people to fake it and would it lead them to participate more?
like, can you do this just for a little while and actually experience a behavioral outcome that makes you seem more powerful?
so we know that our nonverbals govern how other people think and feel about us.
but our question really was, do our nonverbals govern how we think and feel about ourselves?
so the second question really was, you know, so we know that our minds change our bodies, but is it also true that our bodies change our minds?
and when i say minds, in the case of the powerful, what am i talking about?
so what do the minds of the powerful versus the powerless look like?
they actually feel that they're going to win even at games of chance.
so there are a lot of differences.
there are a lot of differences between powerful and powerless people.
so this is what we did.
so you can be standing or you can be sitting.
so two minutes they do this.
so this is what we find.
so this is in the lab.
it might be giving a pitch or giving a talk like this or doing a job interview.
we decided that the one that most people could relate to because most people had been through was the job interview.
what do you do before you go into a job interview?
so this is the job interview we put them through, because we really wanted to see what happened.
i don't want to get there and then still feel like a fraud.
i don't want to get there only to feel like i'm not supposed to be here.
and that really resonated with me, because i want to tell you a little story about being an impostor and feeling like i'm not supposed to be here.
when i was 19, i was in a really bad car accident.
i was thrown from the car.
i was so afraid of being found out the next day that i called her and said, "i'm quitting."
you're going to do every talk that you ever get asked to do.
and that was the moment for me.
you are supposed to be here!
it's not  do it enough until you actually become it and internalize.
the last thing i'm going to leave you with is this.
leave that situation feeling like, oh, i really feel like i got to say who i am and show who i am.
so i want to ask you first, you know, both to try power posing, and also i want to ask you to share the science, because this is simple.
share it with people, because the people who can use it the most are the ones with no resources and no technology and no status and no power.
give it to them because they can do it in private.
and so i'm going to talk a little bit about that, keeping in mind that we have a lot on the program here.
there are a lot of ideas to die for.
many people have laid down their lives for communism, and many have laid down their lives for capitalism.
these are just a few of the ideas that are to die for.
i myself am a philosopher, and one of our occupational hazards is that people ask us what the meaning of life is.
you have to have a statement.
the secret of happiness is: find something more important than you are and dedicate your life to it.
but how could something tie them together?
now here am i talking about his idea.
we don't have much time, and i'm going to go over just a little bit of this and cut out, because there's a lot of other things that are going to be said.
and one of the reasons is that among the creed of shaker-dom is that one should be celibate.
and so they had a ready supply of converts.
and they could keep it going.
so the ideas can live on in spite of the fact that they're not being passed on genetically.
but among all those ideas that inevitably flow out into the whole world thanks to our technology, are a lot of toxic ideas.
but we should recognize that for many people in the world, they are a big deal.
this is not the place for hate and anger.
but the way to deal with that is to do science, and understand how it spreads and why in a morally neutral perspective.
but i'm happy to say now that the world has moved on, music has moved on with it.
so we got some shows off the ground.
now those of us that live in the west, if i can use that term, i think have a much more hidebound attitude or sense of music -- that somehow it's all about skill and systems.
but how many of you would be able to make a confident assertion about a piece of classical music?
now that piece of music that we played at the start of this session had enshrined in its heart the theme, which is ted.
or do i smell some doubt in the room?
i think we should make this even more explicit.
i think we need to sing for our tea.
will you have a go for me?
shall we try that one again?
the youngest of my children was born with cerebral palsy, which as you can imagine, if you don't have an experience of it yourself, is quite a big thing to take on board.
so i find myself asking: where is music in all of this?
and i was born without my left hand -- right hand.
can i do that one again?
if any of you thinks you want to help me in any way to achieve what is a fairly impossible and implausible dream still at this point, please let me know.
i want to start with a story, a la seth godin, from when i was 12 years old.
my uncle ed gave me a beautiful blue sweater -- at least i thought it was beautiful.
and i wore it whenever i could, thinking it was the most fabulous thing i owned.
until one day in ninth grade, when i was standing with a number of the football players.
i tell that story, because it has served and continues to serve as a metaphor to me about the level of connectedness that we all have on this earth.
we so often don't realize what our action and our inaction does to people we think we will never see and never know.
i also tell it because it tells a larger contextual story of what aid is and can be.
not to say that it shouldn't have, but that we have to get better at answering the questions that need to be considered when we think about consequences and responses.
we got a lot of things right.
the women made their own decisions at the end of the day as to how they would use this access to credit to build their little businesses, earn more income so they could take care of their families better.
the genocide happened in 1994, seven years after these women all worked together to build this dream.
and in fact, what we need to do is see that as chapter one, celebrate it, close it, and recognize that we need a chapter two that is all about execution, all about the how-to.
and i want to talk a little bit about that, and some of the examples, so you can see what it is that we're doing.
but before i do this -- and this is another one of my pet peeves -- i want to talk a little bit about who the poor are.
what he did was see what was happening in israel, larger approaches, and figure out how to do a drip irrigation, which is a way of bringing water directly to the plant stock.
after one harvest, they had increased their income enough to buy a second system to do their full quarter-acre.
the question is how can we help africans do this for themselves?
we hope to have seven million at the end of next year.
she runs two of the lines, and has already saved enough money to put a down payment on her house.
she makes about two dollars a day, is creating an education fund, and told me she is not marrying nor having children until these things are completed.
and so, when i told her about our idea -- that maybe we could take a tupperware model from the united states, and find a way for the women themselves to go out and sell these nets to others -- she quickly started calculating what she herself could make and signed up.
children can sleep through the night; the house looks beautiful; you hang them in the window.
to the second son, he left a third of the camels, and to the youngest son, he left a ninth of the camels.
well three sons got into a negotiation.
so then they had 18 camels.
the first son took his half -- half of 18 is nine.
the second son took his third -- a third of 18 is six.
the youngest son took his ninth -- a ninth of 18 is two.
they had one camel left over.
they gave it back to the wise old woman.
now if you think about that story for a moment, i think it resembles a lot of the difficult negotiations we get involved in.
the secret to peace is us.
about 20 years ago, i was in south africa working with the parties in that conflict, and i had an extra month, so i spent some time living with several groups of san bushmen.
so how do they deal with their differences?
well what i learned is whenever tempers rise in those communities, someone goes and hides the poison arrows out in the bush, and then everyone sits around in a circle like this, and they sit, and they talk, and they talk.
perhaps the most fundamental way in which the third side can help is to remind the parties of what's really at stake.
and as the saying goes, when angry, you will make the best speech you will ever regret.
the third side helps us go to the balcony, which is a metaphor for a place of perspective, where we can keep our eyes on the prize.
let me tell you a little story from my own negotiating experience.
i started reacting, but then i tried to remember to go to the balcony.
what we're here to do is to see if we can figure out a way to stop the suffering and the bloodshed in chechnya."
that's the role of the third side, is to help the parties to go to the balcony.
let me just ask you one question first.
how many of you in the last years have ever found yourself worrying about the middle east and wondering what anyone could do?
why do we pay so much attention to this conflict?
is it the number of deaths?
there are a hundred times more people who die in a conflict in africa than in the middle east.
they give meaning to our lives.
and what he stood for was unity, the unity of the family.
now how would you -- now think about that for a moment.
so what if then you took the story of abraham, which is a third side story, what if that could be -- because abraham stands for hospitality -- what if that could be an antidote to terrorism?
how would you bring that story to life?
they need to be able to live the story.
and that was my thinking of how would you do that.
because the simple way to do that is you go for a walk.
you go for a walk in the footsteps of abraham.
because walking has a real power.
now if i were to come to you face-to-face and come this close to you, you would feel threatened.
and so we studied the idea at harvard.
and we then took a bus and took some walks and went to harran, where, in the bible, he sets off on his journey.
we went to damascus, which has a long history associated with abraham.
we showed it could be done.
let me ask you a question.
how many of you have had the experience of being in a strange neighborhood, or strange land, and a total stranger, perfect stranger, comes up to you and shows you some kindness, maybe invites you into their home, gives you a drink, gives you a coffee, gives you a meal?
how many of you have ever had that experience?
but that's what you discover, is you go into these villages in the middle east where you expect hostility, and you get the most amazing hospitality, all associated with abraham.
so what we discovered is that abraham is not just a figure out of a book for those people.
and to make a long story short, in the last couple of years now, thousands of people have begun to walk parts of the path of abraham in the middle east, enjoying the hospitality of the people there.
he said it was like a light that went on in our lives.
but what she can do is cook, and so she's begun to cook for some groups of walkers who come through the village and have a meal in her home.
let me just show you one thing.
i have a little acorn here that i picked up while i was walking on the path earlier this year.
well i think back to my childhood, a good part of which i spent, after being born here in chicago, i spent in europe.
so my question is, if it can be done in europe, why not in the middle east?
why not, thanks to a common identity, which is the story of abraham, and thanks to a common economy that would be based in good part on tourism?
it was done in south africa.
it depends on us taking the third side.
so let me invite you to consider taking the third side, even as a very small step.
so let me just leave you with three things.
about half of them, 600,000, have permanent damage to their heart that will cause them to have very bad problems later on.
what are we going to do about them?
how can we save their lives?
so we have to try these devices out because the fda won't just let us use them on people unless we try it out first, and the best model for this happens to be pigs.
we see that the signal that's actually in the heart, we can use it to tell people that they're having a heart attack even before they have symptoms so we can save their life.
and then he did it again.
what does the system look like?
so we took two copper stents and we put it in the artery of this pig, and let me show you the result that's very gratifying as far as people who have heart disease are concerned.
any one of you now is an expert on st elevation.
can you see it in the picture after the big rise of the qrs -- you see st elevation?
but we had a little bit over an hour where we could've saved this pig's life.
we can save the lives of people who are at high risk for a heart attack.
and that is the migraine invention that we are talking about and that we are working on.
here we have our device in which we put in a frame.
i think she said it looks like a gun.
and that is the second wish.
what do you think someone has at the end of reading 12 single-spaced pages?
and that is one of the ideas.
these are just some starting points.
i wish i had more wishes but three is what i've got and there they are.
but then we decided we needed to do something more.
we needed to take what we had built and create a platform out of it so that it could be used elsewhere in the world.
there is even some from the u.s.
and so we build for it in africa first and then we move to the edges.
how do you decide what is important?
so what we find is that there is this great deal of wasted crisis information because there is just too much information for us to actually do anything with right now.
and what we're actually really concerned with is this first three hours.
what we are looking at is the first three hours.
how do we deal with that information that is coming in?
on the ground and around the world people are still curious, and trying to figure out what is going on.
so we think that there is something interesting we can do here.
and we have a small team who is working on this.
so that we have a better understanding of the probability of something being true or not.
and we are very happy to be part of the ted family.
and my father left me a legacy of his handwriting through letters and a notebook.
after he died, i realized that no one writes to me anymore.
there are times when i want to trade all those years that i was too busy to sit with my dad and chat with him, and trade all those years for one hug.
but that's when i take out his letters and i read them, and the paper that touched his hand is in mine, and i feel connected to him.
so maybe we all need to leave our children with a value legacy, and not a financial one.
so what do i plan to leave for my son?
i took it out for the first time to come here.
and what i'd like to talk a little bit about today are some ideas that i think have just tremendous resonance with all the things that have been talked about the last two days.
and i think it was best witnessed when thomas was playing the music as we came in the room today.
what i mean by that is that anyone in the world is free and allowed to create new music and musical ideas.
anyone in the world is allowed to rip or copy musical ideas, use them in innovative ways.
has anyone here ever been to school?
and this is even more true if you happen to speak a language other than one of the world's major languages, and especially english.
and so what i want to talk about today is trying to take these ideas that we've seen in the musical culture and try to bring these towards reinventing the way we think about writing books, using them and teaching from them.
so, imagine we could do that and imagine we could put people into this.
so that we could truly build an ecosystem with not just authors, but all the people who could be or want to be authors in all the different languages of the world, and i think if you could do this, it would be called, well, i'm just going to refer to it as a knowledge ecosystem.
so what are some of the people that are using these kind of tools?
a lot of teachers are using this stuff.
and we've also been working with a number of other organizations.
and i think a lot of you received, i think all of you received one of these music books in your gift pack.
how much would it cost in a bookstore?
why does it cost 22 dollars?
how many people know about xml?
we came up with this six-and-a-half years ago because i teach the stuff in the red box.
and the thing that i realized is there was no way that i, as an engineer, could write this book that would get all of this across.
the second big enabler is intellectual property, because in fact i got up here and i talked about how great the music culture is.
and we would be accused of pirates for doing that, because this music has been propertized.
at the bottom of every piece of material in connexions and in lots of other projects, you can find their logo.
how do we protect it into the future?
so that could be a problem.
this is a little bit of a problem, so we clearly need some kind of idea of quality control, and this is really where the idea of review and peer review comes in.
why do you come to ted?
so i'd just like to end by saying, you can really view this as a call to action.
and if you read the press, it actually last week said i quit the media lab.
and the third is a little bit less obvious.
and that is that we all in this room learned how to walk, how to talk, not by being taught how to talk, or taught how to walk, but by interacting with the world, by having certain results as a consequence of being able to ask for something, or being able to stand up and reach it.
but it was really through teaching.
and one of the things in general that computers have provided to learning is that it now includes a kind of learning which is a little bit more like walking and talking, in the sense that a lot of it's driven by the learner himself or herself.
so when you see that kind of thing, this is not something that you have to test.
go to the back of the line and someone else will do it, and then when you figure out that this works, you can join as well.
we will do it by going to seven large countries and getting them to agree and launch it, and then the others can follow.
and we have a situation today which is incredible.
why are we all sitting there?"
now this people ask all the time what it is.
so you really can bring into a village, and then the villages can connect themselves, and you really can do it quite well.
that's why a lot of our people are more or less living in taiwan right now.
and in about 30 days we'll know for sure whether this works.
the working one is at mit.
the idea was that it would be not only a laptop, but that it could transform and be into an electronic book.
everybody thinks they know about education, a lot of culture is built into it as well.
and since i visit each one of those countries within at least every three months, i'm just going around the world every three weeks.
here's sort of the schedule, and i put at the bottom we might give some away free in two years at this meeting.
and one of the ways -- just one -- but one of the ways to help in the case of the gray market is to make something that is so utterly unique.
so we want to make it very much like a white volvo.
an uncle gives a niece or a nephew that as a birthday present.
that is really done in the countries.
i would like to tell you all that you are all actually cyborgs, but not the cyborgs that you think.
but humans are curious, and they like to add things to their bodies so they can go to the alps one day and then become a fish in the sea the next.
and the other thing that happens is that we're all carrying around little mary poppins technology.
and if you actually lose that information, it means that you suddenly have this loss in your mind, that you suddenly feel like something's missing, except you aren't able to see it, so it feels like a very strange emotion.
the other thing that happens is that you have a second self.
and suddenly we have to start to maintain our second self.
and the problem is that a lot of people now, especially adolescents, have to go through two adolescences.
i thought i was very clever.
he took a piece of paper, drew a and b on one side and the other and folded them together so where a and b touched.
and i want to make a time machine."
they would click on a button, and they would be connected as a to b immediately.
you can stand on one side of the world, whisper something and be heard on the other.
one of the other ideas that comes around is that you have a different type of time on every single device that you use.
and so this is very important.
it can go on a long time.
this is a really important process.
you can think of it a bit like pruning a rosebush.
this is the same set of shelves from his point of view.
so imagine he tells you to move the top truck left.
so we sometimes laugh about teenagers.
i have a really nice anecdote from a friend of mine who said that the thing he noticed most about his teenage daughters before and after puberty was their level of embarrassment in front of him.
i want you to take a trip with me.
picture yourself driving down a small road in africa, and as you drive along, you look off to the side, and this is what you see: you see a field of graves.
and you stop, and you get out of your car and you take a picture.
we talk about things in relative terms.
so it's the test a mother gets when she comes in.
and where do they come from?
100 come from asia and the pacific.
and so these are the tests a nurse now has to do in those same few minutes.
and so we need to find better ways of providing care.
and so we need to do more, we need to do it differently, we need to do it in ways that are affordable and accessible and can be taken to scale, which means it can be done everywhere.
so, i want to tell you a story -- i want to take you on a little trip.
and the nurse takes you into a room, and she tells you about the tests and hiv and the medicines you can take and how to take care of yourself and your baby, and you hear none of it.
and i want to change the story a little bit.
your baby is going to be hiv-negative."
mothers take care of the children, take care of the home.
so often the men are gone.
and they support them around the diagnosis and educate them about how to take their medicines, how to take care of themselves, how to take care of their babies.
so the mothers who work for us, they come from the communities in which they work.
so how do we do it?
and this is so important in breaking through the stigma.
she had been asked by one of the clients to go to the home of the client, because the client wanted to tell the mother and her brothers and sisters about her hiv status, and she was afraid to go by herself.
and the patient walked into the house and said to her mother and siblings, "i have something to tell you.
and then her oldest brother stood up and said, "i too have something to tell you.
i thought you were going to throw me out of the family."
and you see where this is going.
i thought you were going to hate me."
and there they were, all of them together for the first time being able to share this experience for the first time and to support each other for the first time.
i am proof that there is hope.
how do you build a better health care system?
and so what nurses do is that they ask the mentor mothers to explain how to take the drugs, the side effects.
so we go back to the prevention of mother to child transmission.
those who are hiv-infected must know how to take care of themselves.
i came here today to talk about what's wrong with our food system.
i also used to think that all of our food came from these happy, little farms where pigs rolled in mud and cows grazed on grass all day.
the food they produce have been proven to cause cancer and other problems in lab animals, and people have been eating food produced this way since the 1990s.
how can i change these things?
this is what i found out.
and that way i can have a greater impact on the world.
i want you to know that we can all make a difference by making different choices, by buying our food directly from local farmers, or our neighbors who we know in real life.
with all these things i've been learning about the food system, it seems to me that we can either pay the farmer, or we can pay the hospital.
now i know definitely which one i would choose.
sometimes i go to bill's farm and volunteer, so i can see up close and personal where the meat i eat comes from.
i want you to know that i believe kids will eat fresh vegetables and good food if they know more about it and where it really comes from.
i try to share this everywhere i go.
and that, my friends, is how we can make a difference one kid at a time.
and i thought that there was -- i thought that there was absolutely no way in hell to top that.
but i just wanted to say -- and i mean this without irony -- i think i can speak for everybody in the audience when i say that i wish to god that you were the president of the united states.
bring it over here and open it up.
all right, now i want to do a little bit of a thing for you ...
now -- one of the things that is very important to me is to try and figure out what on earth am i here for.
they did some research; we came back; and we think we have the perfect prototype of what the students in the field are actually asking for.
and he and his team of junior-high school students were doing real science.
so i want to show you some prototypes.
and we -- we wanted just to show you what this might look like in situ.
now can you look at that carefully and see if you see the virgin mary?
i tried to make it a little bit clearer.
and i want you to get out a pen, and i want you to write a terrorist note.
and then i want you to fold that note into a paper airplane.
and once you've folded it into a paper airplane, i want you to take some anthrax -- and i want you to put that in the paper airplane.
and then i want you to throw it on jim young.
now i wanted to use this talk to talk about global warming a little bit.
parenthetically, over there on the slopes, i did want to show you that black men ski.
and all the trees have turned brown.
and it was really a turning point in my life, where i started to realize that i couldn't just go have fun doing science and exploration.
i needed to put it into a context.
and i'm going to tell you that story here in a moment.
and i do believe that we are at the hockey stick point of the protected area in the ocean.
i think we would have gotten there a lot earlier if we could see what happens in the ocean like we can see what happens on land.
so where are the phoenix islands?
but tell me where they are and the country that owns them."
so that's when i first learned of the islands and had no idea what i was getting into.
but i was in for the adventure.
there's actually more mountains in the ocean than there are on land.
but we got up there, and i had the unique and wonderful scientific opportunity and personal opportunity to get to a place that had never been dived and just get to an island and go, "okay, where are we going to dive?
and then over to the east we have the line islands.
and when i was first going up there, i barely knew the name of this country 10 years ago, and people would ask me, "why are you going to this place called kiribati?"
and these nations are faced with a real problem.
we as a world are faced with a problem.
what do we do with displaced fellow earthlings who no longer have a home on the planet?
but if you come, you have to buy lunch for everybody who comes to the seminar."
and the country never knew this.
and are you free for dinner?"
so we walked away from this dinner really not knowing where to go at that point.
i went back to the states and started looking around to see if i could find examples where reverse fishing licenses had been issued, and it turned out there were none.
they realized that this was a common cause that they had found with the conservation community.
so suddenly we had this area that we were protecting, but now it appeared to be dead, at least in the coral areas.
and we are now in the process of raising the full endowment.
we just had our first pipa trust board meeting three weeks ago.
but i would say the most important one in my mind was working within the market forces of the situation.
and at the time i was very superstitious.
so the plane landed in between the buildings and got to a full stop in front of this little billboard.
but i actually walked away with a great job offer.
so it turned out that not only was the billboard still up but they had put this one right next to it.
on the other hand, it also taught me where superstition gets me because i really had a terrible time in hong kong.
my brother had this great yamaha motorcycle that he was willing to borrow to me freely.
and i remember it as a true moment of happiness.
now, what i took away from the exhibit was that maybe with the exception of the mandala most of the pieces in there were actually about the visualization of happiness and not about happiness.
now, the way this works in the system is that nobody ever looks at these signs.
and it takes you a while until it actually -- you realize that this says something different than what it normally says.
and the room is truly something to be seen.
and other people go and fill them in.
i think that was -- the most surprising to myself was that the writing was actually so good.
i think the reason this works so well is because everybody involved wins.
which brought me back to my list making -- you know, just to see what i actually like about my job.
try not to get stuck doing the same thing -- or try not get stuck behind the computer all day.
and being able to enjoy the end results.
and then i found another list in one of my diaries that actually contained all the things that i thought i learned in my life so far.
and the whole thing just fell together.
so i just picked one of the things that i thought i learned -- in this case, "everything i do always comes back to me" -- and we made these spreads right out of this.
so i just picked another one.
and this was two weeks ago.
and then we did one more of these.
and all of them, just like the prophets who get their message from god through gabriel, get their message from above.
these are clearly biblical archetypes, and the thinking behind that was to create positive, globally-resonating storylines that could be tied to the same things that other people were pulling mean messages out of because then the person that's using religion for the wrong purpose just becomes a bad man with a bad message.
this is the kind of thinking that went into creating the 99.
so the librarians find out and they get together a special solution, a chemical solution called king's water, that when mixed with 99 stones would be able to save all that culture and history in the books.
so the idea of an open architecture, an open knowledge, is not new to my neck of the desert.
and the last point about the 99 noor stones is this.
there's this very strong social message that needs to get to kind of the deepest crevices of intolerance, and the only way to get there is to kind of play the game.
so i called him up a few weeks afterward.
and the 99 were like superheroes kind of flying out of what was happening around the world.
so if we can get the lights ...
as the father of five sons, i worry about who they're going to be using as role models.
as a psychologist, i worry for the world in general, but worry about the perception of how people see themselves in my part of the world.
and the first one was about a group called the party of god, who wanted to ban valentine's day.
what blew their mind was the first one took place in india, it was the party of a hindu god.
but i borrow a lesson that i learned from him.
last summer when we were in our home in new york, he was out in the yard playing in his playhouse.
and what rayan did then is he sat there, he tapped his foot on the floor, at three and a half, and he looked at me and he said, "baba, i want you to come with me to my office in my house.
and what you can see straight away is you start to have a different relationship to the numbers.
let me point out some that i really like.
so now it's great because now we have this texture, and we can add numbers to it as well.
how much of this diagram do you think might be taken up by the debt that africa owes to the west?
what has that cost the world?
so these are what our fears look like over time in our media.
but if you start working with it and playing with it in a certain way, interesting things can appear and different patterns can be revealed.
but if you ask the right kind of question, or you work it in the right kind of way, interesting things can emerge.
i wonder if i could make my life beautiful.
i just kind of learned through doing.
your sense of sight is the fastest.
if you combine the language of the eye with the language of the mind, which is about words and numbers and concepts, you start speaking two languages simultaneously, each enhancing the other.
now you can also do this with soldiers.
we need relative figures that are connected to other data so that we can see a fuller picture, and then that can lead to us changing our perspective.
and if it can do that, maybe it can also change your behavior.
take a look at this one.
i just change a row on a spreadsheet.
but it can go beyond data, and it can go beyond numbers.
so we can have a look.
the fragrance that you will smell, you will never be able to smell this way again.
i will show it to you.
and do not get the impression that this is very subjective.
smell has this reputation of being somewhat different for each person.
you really dont want to leave it if you want to have a career in perfumery.
and i had to learn chemistry on the fly in the last three years.
and i will try and explain to you whats wrong with this notion.
i love the idea of doing less work.
the things are a different color!"
we have to go a little beyond that.
so i went searching when i started in this game to convince myself that there was any degree of plausibility to this whole crazy story.
if it didnt, the whole idea was toast, and i might as well move on to other things.
so you can try a thousand molecules, you can try ten thousand molecules in a weekend, and then you only tell the chemists to make the right one.
so they asked us to make a new coumarin.
and so we started doing calculations.
why should new ideas be accepted?
what are we going to do about it?
and many people might need help in computation.
do you think your bank is going to show that to people?
and one of the things i'm most proud of is this agreement for ibm.
and there is some good news to report today.
all the parts of the document in red are not intelligible.
they have been tested in the laboratory.
there are a couple of things going on right now that i want to bring to your attention.
there is no way that we should allow government to communicate the way they communicate.
having spent 18 years as a child of the state in children's homes and foster care, you could say that i'm an expert on the subject, and in being an expert, i want to let you know that being an expert does in no way make you right in light of the truth.
it seems that writers know that the child outside of family reflects on what family truly is more than what it promotes itself to be.
how have we not made the connection?
and why have we not made the connection, between  how has that happened?
my own mother  and i should say this here  she same to this country in the late '60s, and she was, you know, she found herself pregnant, as women did in the late '60s.
you were separated from your family by the state.
you were separated from your family and placed into mother and baby homes.
what happened then is a direct reflection of what is happening now.
it was a summer of love if you were white.
you know, i have to say this in the houses -- it's her plan to have me fostered for a short period of time while she studies.
she was an evil woman too selfish to sign, so i spent those 11 years kneeling and praying.
and then i was supposed to determine whether that was the voice of god or it was the voice of the devil.
and it turns out i've got the devil inside of me.
so anyway, two years sort of passed, and they had a child of their own, and then another two years passed, and they had another child of their own, and then another time passed and they had another child that they called an accident, which i thought was an unusual name.
my foster mother asked me to go away to think about love and what it is and to read the scriptures and to come back tomorrow and give my most honest and truthful answer.
if they were asking me whether i loved them or not, then i mustn't love them, which led me to the miracle of thought that i thought they wanted me to get to.
"i will ask god for forgiveness and his light will shine through me to them.
but because i had no family to inquire about me, they could do anything to me.
every time i had a visit by a person who i did not know who would feed me grapes, once every three months, i was strip-searched.
that home was full of young boys who were on remand for things like murder.
and this was the preparation that i was being given after 17 years as a child of the state.
i have to tell this story.
i have to tell it, because there was no one to put two and two together.
i slowly became aware that i knew nobody that knew me for longer than a year.
one was to find my family, and the other was to write poetry.
i've just got to say it to you all: i found all of my family in my adult life.
i mean the child of the state.
best enjoyed with a glass of wine.
i was the better at getting and keeping.
you were the better at spend and spend; i was the better at grubbing and heaping, but who was the better man in the end?
you were the better with lords and ladies, i was the better at pillaging troy; you were the better at kissing the babies, i was the better at search and destroy.
i was the better at improvisation, you were the better at spinning the plates; i was the better at procrastination, you were the better at quiet debate.
you were the better at rolling a reefer, i was the better at coke and rum; remember that night on the beach in ibiza?
my mother was certainly the most important in mine.
let me try and describe her to you.
but my mother has lived by this creed all her life.
keep to the track, to the beaten track; treat every day of your life as your last.
you think we want you to do it, but we don't want you to do it.
tell them to go to hell.
you bodies are wonderful as they are.
nothing good can come of this.
nor may time be bought or sold.
never was there one so fair!
i hope you know that now.
hail to the gods of america!
hail to the gods of the dream.
the worship of those we hate.
and if you would like to know why i am not a father -- i, who by a miracle have 22 godchildren -- the answer is in this poem, which upsets me every time i read it.
at 30 my powers seemed mighty to me.
and women grew willing to sham and to bluff.
so i started to write poetry.
but sometimes i try to put myself in an evil man's position.
but sometimes i try to put myself in that position.
i love to think what they thought, what it was like.
you can do anything you want.
we killed every single one of them.
and i am as bad as you.
i never did anything to anyone that wasn't.
and you stay up for 12.
what do i say to them?
i only stopped because i thought if i got caught, what would happen to my mother.
i want to point out here at this point that i've spent my life obsessed by objects and the stories that they tell, and this was the very latest one.
but the damage had been done.
i don't have the room for this in my house, but i had to finish what i had started.
and this actually represented kind of a sea change to me.
and so now it was time to do some research.
what do they do, how do you start something like that?
now there's a lot of ways to fill and get yourself a nice smooth finish.
now, the great thing about getting it to this point was that because in the movie, when they finally bring out the bird at the end, and they place it on the table, they actually spin it.
this is where it gets weird.
it would seem that the object of desire only comes into its own by disappearing repeatedly.
this thing was made of resin and it was too light.
like it is in the movie.
there's a thing that happens when you mold and cast things, which is that every time you throw it into silicone and cast it in resin, you lose a little bit of volume, you lose a little bit of size.
we belong to the family called the hominidae.
we have a common past, and we have a common future.
and it is important to remember that all of these great apes have come on as long and as interesting evolutionary journey as we ourselves have today.
and this is how we look for them.
we still really haven't got a very complete picture of it.
and these things are so exciting.
they are so often the only, or the very first time that anybody has ever seen the remains.
and it is one of the most special things to ever do with your mother.
not many people can say that.
if you want to become a fossil, you actually need to die somewhere where your bones will be rapidly buried.
you then hope that the earth moves in such a way as to bring the bones back up to the surface.
and then you hope that one of us lot will walk around and find small pieces of you.
and we really have only spent 50 years looking for these remains, and begin to actually piece together our evolutionary story.
but it is not to say that being a single species on planet earth is the norm.
where did these things come from?
and what was so fun about it was this: the skull pieces got closer and closer to the roots of the tree, and fairly recently the tree had grown up, but it had found that the skull had captured nice water in the hillside, and so it had decided to grow its roots in and around this, holding it in place and preventing it from washing away down the slope.
and what is it that really makes us us?
we have to control our numbers, and i think this is as important as anything else that's being done in the world today.
but we have to control our numbers, because we can't really hold it together as a species.
we have a common past and we share a common future.
we could tell every single human being out there, if we really wanted to.
but will we do that, or will we just let nature take its course?
she shares a powerful story about the human potential for recovery.
her message: you are not your body, and giving up old dreams can allow new ones to soar.
we'd been on our bikes for around five and half hours when we got to the part of the ride that i loved, and that was the hills, because i loved the hills.
and i got up off the seat of my bike, and i started pumping my legs, and as i sucked in the cold mountain air, i could feel it burning my lungs, and i looked up to see the sun shining in my face.
i broke some bones in my feet.
i was having a really bad day.
i had an awareness of being in my body, but also being out of my body, somewhere else, watching from above as if it was happening to someone else.
why would i want to go back to a body that was so broken?
it can no longer serve me."
it was the fight of my life.
the next concern was whether i would walk again, because i was paralyzed from the waist down.
they put me on a beanbag.
i had one arm in plaster, one arm tied down by drips.
i had a neck brace and sandbags on either side of my head and i saw my world through a mirror that was suspended above my head.
i shared the ward with five other people, and the amazing thing is that because we were all lying paralyzed in a spinal ward, we didn't know what each other looked like.
and each of us knew that when we left the spinal ward we would never be the same.
i soaked it up and i thought, how could i ever have taken this for granted?
but you're going to get home and realize how different life is."
and i got home and something happened.
i realized sister sam was right.
and i wanted to give up.
all i wanted to do was put my running shoes on and run out the door.
i wanted my old life back.
and i can remember mom sitting on the end of my bed, and saying, "i wonder if life will ever be good again."
they told me, "we're going to move you next to her because we think it will be good for her."
and i wondered how had she ever found that level of acceptance.
i could keep fighting this or i could let go and accept not only my body but the circumstances of my life.
and then i thought to myself, maybe being at rock bottom is actually the perfect place to start.
i had never before thought of myself as a creative person.
and even though i had absolutely no idea what i was going to do, in that uncertainty came a sense of freedom.
i was no longer tied to a set path.
and they took one look and ran out the back to draw short straws.
they lifted me into the cockpit.
and i was a long, long way from that spinal ward, and i knew right then that i was going to be a pilot.
and i practiced my walking as much as i could, and i went from the point of two people holding me up to one person holding me up to the point where i could walk around the furniture as long as it wasn't too far apart.
but at least she always knew where i was.
and sometimes i thought that too.
and then i learned to fly in bad weather as well as fine weather and got my instrument rating.
and then i found myself back at that same school where i'd gone for that very first flight, teaching other people how to fly, just under 18 months after i'd left the spinal ward.
but then i knew for certain that although my body might be limited, it was my spirit that was unstoppable.
i now know that it wasn't until i let go of who i thought i was that i was able to create a completely new life.
it wasn't until i let go of the life i thought i should have that i was able to embrace the life that was waiting for me.
i now know that my real strength never came from my body, and although my physical capabilities have changed dramatically, who i am is unchanged.
the pilot light inside of me was still a light, just as it is in each and every one of us.
and then it no longer matters what you look like, where you come from, or what you do for a living.
get more sleep
and my little idea that will do that is sleep.
i hit my head on my desk.
and we women are going to lead the way in this new revolution, this new feminist issue.
we are literally going to sleep our way to the top, literally.
i was recently having dinner with a guy who bragged that he had only gotten four hours sleep the night before.
while all the brothers were busy just being hyper-connected 24/7, maybe a sister would have noticed the iceberg, because she would have woken up from a seven-and-a-half- or eight-hour sleep and have been able to see the big picture.
right after i completed my ph.d., i was lucky enough to be included with a group of scientists that was using it for the first time as a tool for ocean exploration.
and the reason i turned out the lights is because i knew i would see this phenomenon of animals making light called bioluminescence.
now i want to share with you a little video that i shot from a submersible.
now, when i was first doing this, all i was trying to do was count the numbers of sources.
but i started to realize that i could actually identify animals by the type of flashes they produced.
but you don't always have to go down to the depths of the ocean to see a light show like this.
well, for animals that are trying to avoid predators by staying in the darkness, light can still be very useful for the three basic things that animals have to do to survive: and that's find food, attract a mate and avoid being eaten.
and then when it's not using it, it actually can roll it down into its head just like the headlights on your lamborghini.
this fish actually has high beams.
and i have no idea why there's two, and that's something i want to solve some day -- but not only can it see blue light, but it can see red light.
so it uses its red bioluminescence like a sniper's scope to be able to sneak up on animals that are blind to red light and be able to see them without being seen.
and a lot of animals will use their bioluminescence as a lure.
the teeth on this fish are so long that if they closed inside the mouth of the fish, it would actually impale its own brain.
these are the eyes of a living anglerfish.
he has no lure for attracting food and no teeth for eating it when it gets there.
so this little guy has found himself this babe, and you will note that he's had the good sense to attach himself in a way that he doesn't actually have to look at her.
but he still knows a good thing when he sees it, and so he seals the relationship with an eternal kiss.
and we were using a special trawling net that we were able to bring these animals up alive.
so we captured one of these, and i brought it into the lab.
we capture it in a very special device on the front of the submersible that allows us to bring it up in really pristine condition, bring it into the lab on the ship.
the primary way that we know about what lives in the ocean is we go out and drag nets behind ships.
but there came a moment when it all came together, and everything worked.
so now we had a system that we could actually take to some place that was kind of like an oasis on the bottom of the ocean that might be patrolled by large predators.
and i had my window into the deep sea.
i could not have asked for a better proof of concept.
i only know nine lovegroves, two of which are my parents.
i was hanging on to have a pee.
i thought perhaps if i was hanging on long enough, that would guide me through the 18 minutes.
but today what i'd like to talk to you about is that love of form and how form can touch people's soul and emotion.
i could have been, perhaps, but i work in this world where i trust my instincts.
we look at how that is produced.
these are the invisible things that you never see in your life.
it has to feel like nothing.
it was when i put the water in that i realized that i'd put a skin on water itself.
but i can live up to that.
i have this special interest in things like this which blow my mind.
how that flows through me and how that comes out is what i'm trying to understand.
i have these in my office.
this is one of my specimens.
i set out to look at natural forms.
these actually are sold as artwork.
but this is how i get to that object.
we need to be in that realm.
this is a new chair which should come on the market in september.
how you grow legs out of a surface.
if i just got some time.
i've had this image of a water droplet for 20 years sitting on a hot bed.
that is an image of a car for me.
they laughed everywhere over the world i showed this.
it opens and closes like a bread bin.
you take them off your wall.
i built this thing for my studio.
we should all be riding one of these.
the first sculptural model i made for that thing in tokyo.
if all the people who were talking over this period worked on a car together, it would be a joy, absolute joy.
it was made of glass, and this building really helped me to do my job good.
the building was a true bird-killer.
and this is what i saw when i looked out of the window.
both are of the male sex.
both are of the male sex.
after 75 minutes   i had seen enough, and i got hungry, and i wanted to go home.
a is my office, b is the place where the duck hit the glass, and c is from where i watched it.
this is its first time on the u.s.
please note that this is necrophilia.
it took all day, and the prisoners had a great time.
and here you see a dead duck.
another example of the impact of glass buildings on the life of birds.
the only thing this bird did was fly against this window from 2004 to 2008, day in and day out.
so what this bird does is fight his own image.
and as you know, or as you may not know, this is one of the major causes of death for birds in the world.
this is the sound of a dirty sock.
it's not my fault, because  and so another thing that happens is that i started having this secondary effect that normal sounds started to become color.
and this is a completely different song.
and most people change their preference when i tell them that the one on the left is hitler and the one on the right is martin luther king.
i think this will be a big, big change that we will see during this century.
i would encourage you to become a cyborg.
if you build a wide road out to the outskirts of town, people will move there.
it was in a grizzly bear preserve, although no one told me that before we went.
she'd just been involved in an episode where a parent had threatened to sue the school because she lowered the grade of the student by 10 percent when he turned the paper in late.
so, she had to go to meeting after meeting, same arguments made over and over again.
you have to go in a school bus."
so, they provided a bus that held 60 people and drove the three of them back and forth several hours to laramie.
but he was told he couldn't go on the hike this year because one of the students in the class was disabled, so the other 25 students didn't get to go on the hike either.
at the end of this day i could have filled a book just with stories about law from this one teacher.
people no longer feel free to act on their best judgment.
is it possible that the doctor might have done something differently when the sick person gets sicker?
doctors can make more on ordering tests sometimes, and also they no longer even know what's right or wrong.
we did a study of all the rules that affect one school in new york.
public agenda did a survey for us a couple of years ago where they found that 43 percent of the high school teachers in america say that they spend at least half of their time maintaining order in the classroom.
that means those students are getting half the learning they're supposed to, because if one child is disrupting the class no one can learn.
and how has this system of law worked for government?
that means all the boys are going to be add.
because why would you have to tell people that something was actually hot?
so, none of these people are doing what they think is right.
in the areas that are regulated, there are so many rules no human could possibly know it.
but law is different than other kinds of uncertainties, because it carries with it the power of state.
and so the state can come in.
it actually changes the way people think.
because no one will want to take the risk of a lawsuit.
and so here is the fourth proposition.
law has to be simple enough so that people can internalize it in their daily choices.
and how do you make it simple?
the problem is, we created a system where we eliminated the right to have good values.
it doesn't mean that people in authority can do whatever they want.
what the world needs now is to restore the authority to make common choices.
the first thing i want to do is say thank you to all of you.
the second thing i want to do is introduce my co-author and dear friend and co-teacher.
ken and i have been working together for almost 40 years.
and even as we do our own work, all too often, we find ourselves having to choose between doing what we think is the right thing and doing the expected thing, or the required thing, or the profitable thing.
or if they do have our interests at heart, we worry that they don't know us well enough to figure out what they need to do in order to allow us to secure those interests.
instead, all they have to do is look up on the list what kind of sentence goes with what kind of crime.
but what we believe, and what we argue in the book, is that there is no set of rules, no matter how detailed, no matter how specific, no matter how carefully monitored and enforced, there is no set of rules that will get us what we need.
so it's just a question of waiting for the next one and then marveling at how we could have been so stupid as not to protect ourselves against that.
we need people who want to do the right thing.
dealing with other people demands a kind of flexibility that no set of rules can encompass.
wise people know how to improvise.
the rules are like the notes on the page, and that gets you started, but then you dance around the notes on the page, coming up with just the right combination for this particular moment with this particular set of fellow players.
a wise person knows when to improvise.
so it matters that you do this wise practice in the service of others and not in the service of yourself.
and so the will to do the right thing is just as important as the moral skill of improvisation and exception-finding.
he had never committed a crime before.
he was a responsible husband and father.
spend your night in jail, spend your day holding down a job.
and by the way, this appeal went through after he had finished serving his sentence, so he was out and working at a job and taking care of his family and he had to go back into jail.
now ken and i are not naive, and we understand that you need to have rules.
people have to make a living.
we know that if you reward kids for drawing pictures, they stop caring about the drawing and care only about the reward.
if you reward kids for reading books, they stop caring about what's in the books and only care about how long they are.
what we want, of course, is doctors who do just the right amount of procedures and do the right amount for the right reason -- namely, to serve the welfare of their patients.
and so what they do is they follow the scripts, but they follow the scripts at double-time and squirrel away little bits of extra time during which they teach in the way that they actually know is effective.
and one day he was faced with the case of gary pettengill.
he was only able to get part-time work because of his back, and so he was unable to earn enough to put food on the table and take care of his family.
in the veterans' court -- this was the first of its kind in the united states.
it was a court only for veterans who had broken the law.
and he had created it exactly because mandatory sentencing laws were taking the judgment out of judging.
there are now 22 cities that have veterans' courts like this.
anyone would glom onto a criminal justice system that has this kind of a record.
and in order to be an effective doctor, you need to treat people who have lives and not just disease.
so there are lots of examples like this that we talk about.
people want to be allowed to be virtuous.
they want to have permission to do the right thing.
they don't want to feel like they need to take a shower to get the moral grime off their bodies everyday when they come home from work.
there's now a lot of research being done in psychology on what makes people happy, and the two things that jump out in study after study -- i know this will come as a shock to all of you -- the two things that matter most to happiness are love and work.
rules and incentives don't tell you how to be a good friend, how to be a good parent, how to be a good spouse, or how to be a good doctor or a good lawyer or a good teacher.
in giving us the will and the skill to do the right thing -- to do right by others -- practical wisdom also gives us the will and the skill to do right by ourselves.
they could be "re-commissioned," but the way they count things, which is very complicated, we think we have about a third of the nuclear weapons we had before.
so it meant if you attacked us, we would attack you virtually simultaneously, and the end result would be a destruction of your country and mine.
so what we offered ourselves was a collection of things.
here is their first big public announcement.
we would move people out of the target cities into the countryside.
it was just completely off the wall.
turns out that they had another idea behind it, even though this was -- they were telling the public it was to save us.
the main point here is we were dealing with a complete disconnect from reality.
so i'm going to tell you what the implications of that are in just a second.
