this month was first called "sextilis" in latin, because it was the sixth month in the old roman calendar.
an extra month was moved from february in order to make the of august seem more important.
this is a person you can trust.
plants and animals also need air to live: it is very important to everyone.
he was the first person to think of using a computer for different things.
and was forced to make a choice.
she has an older brother, chad, and a twin brother who is 12 minutes younger than she is.
her parents had worked as teachers at a military base in lahr, germany.
farming is the growing of crops or keeping of animals by people for food and raw materials.
wheat and barley are some of the first crops people grew.
people may have started farming because the weather and soil began to change.
farming can feed many more people than gathering on the same amount of land.
extra food or animals are sold for money or other things the farmer cannot grow.
this is good in the short term, but can be bad for the country and the surrounding environment over many years.
many farms also use machines, which cut down on the number of people needed to farm the land.
this results in fewer farmers in rich countries, but the farms are able to produce more food.
having fewer farmers also changes society and can make a country less able to feed itself in bad times.
they then try to patent the seeds and sell them back to the poor countries.
it is important for there to be enough food for everyone.
the food must also be safe and of good quality.
some people say the food is not always good.
they say it is sometimes not safe, because it contains some chemicals.
there are some serious problems that face people trying to grow food today.
if the plants get a big amount of water they can die, if they get a small amount of water they can dry up and die, so that's why all plants need a perfect amount of water depending on what type of plant it is.
it is a part of mathematics.
a skilled worker has to have a very good knowledge of arithmetic and the english language in order to earn the right salary.
one group has five of these objects.
the other group has 3 of these objects.
another way to find the number of objects in both groups is to add the numbers in each group.
sally and bill have added three children to their two children and now have five children.
they managed the land in a way that meant there was usually plenty of food.
every few years the aboriginal people would burn the grass and small trees.
this meant that a lot of grass grew back, but not many big trees.
australia has a lot of trees that have very hard wood that was good for spear making.
the aboriginal people did not think that the land belonged to them.
they believed that they had grown from the land, so it was like their mother, and they belonged to the land.
they sailed up the coast and captain cook named the land that he saw "new south wales".
at last they sailed into a large open bay which was full of fish and stingrays which the sailors speared for food.
solander went ashore and were astonished to find that they did not know what any of the plants or birds or animals that they saw were.
he saw them fishing and hunting and collecting grass seeds and fruit.
but there were no houses and no fences.
in most parts of the world, people put up a house and a fence or some marker to show that they own the land.
they belonged to the land, like a baby belongs to its mother.
a person could be sentenced to death for stealing a loaf of bread.
many people were hanged for small crimes.
but usually they were just thrown in gaol.
they were to make a new colony at the place that captain cook had discovered, named botany bay, because of the plants found there by the two scientists.
he went with two ships up the coast and sailed into a great harbour which he said was "the finest harbour in the world!"
there were many small bays on the harbour so he decided on one which had a good stream of fresh water and some flat shore to land on.
for the first few years of the settlement, things were very difficult.
there was only one man who was a farmer.
all the plants were different so no-one knew which ones could be eaten.
there was a grave danger that everyone in the new colony would die of starvation.
because australia is such a very large land, it was easy to think that it might be able to hold a very large number of people.
the other main party is the liberal party
people often think words are abbreviations when in fact they are acronyms.
they usually have wings like a bird.
the word angel comes from the greek word "angelos" which means "messenger".
few angels are named in the bible apart from michael and gabriel.
because it works and is also unfair to everyone who would benefit from what they say, it is considered to be a weak or poor argument.
in this example it can be seen that the (completely unrelated) fact that person a is uneducated and poor is used to prove that abortion should not be illegal.
this is why they called the people "indians".
sometimes these people are called "indians", but this is confusing, because it is the same word used for people from india.
some people think that they came to the americas even before that.
the flesh of the fruit is firm with a taste anywhere from sour to sweet.
if one wants to grow a certain type of apple it is not possible to do this by planting a seed from the wanted type.
this means that the tree which would grow from planting would be a mixture of two.
in the united kingdom there are about 3000 different types of apples.
even though these religions are quite different from each other in many ways, they also agree in many other very important ways on the basic general nature of the one god whom they worship.
they also all believe that people should pray to this god often.
here are steps you can use to solve the problem.
if ann gives sue 6 jellybeans, they will have the same number of jellybeans.
the purpose of simple story problems such as this one is to teach algebra, so that the students can use algebra when faced with a problem that is too hard to solve any other way.
algebra can be used to solve real problems because the rules of algebra work in real life and numbers can be used to represent the values of real things.
the book was then given the name 'algebra'.
it is the smallest part of an element that still has the properties of that certain element.
others are called stable, meaning they do not give off any radiation.
they should only be handled by experts because they can make people very sick if not handled correctly.
every different kind of atom has a name and every name has an abbreviation.
it was done even before history was written.
the early astronomers were traders and sailors who needed the stars to guide them at night.
early people studied the stars using only their eyes as telescopes and binoculuars had not yet been invented.
he came up with the idea of a solar system where the earth and planets move around the sun.
galileo got into trouble with the church though because he argued against the idea that earth was the center of everything.
looking at something with just your eyes is called using your naked eye.
there are also astronomers who never look at the sky at all.
the word architect is even starting to be used as a verb.
a successful building should speak of wisdom handed down through thousands of years.
these have no grain like real wood, so they dip and collapse with only a small amount of weight.
these laws were learned from centuries of experience and they are as true today as they were 2000 years ago.
buildings can now be built taller than ever before.
it seems incredible that we can make these mistakes, when our ancestors built with such skill and beauty.
we have come a long way since our first mud huts, but perhaps we have also lost something along the way.
asteroids may look like small stars in the sky, but they really do move around the sun, while stars only seem to move because the earth spins.
the history of the land does not begin in 1747.
the area which is now known as afghanistan was then called "khorasan" and it was a prosperous and important province of iran, as it was the seat of most rulers.
spanish is the language most people speak and the official language, but many other languages are spoken.
its history can be followed to the ninth century.
at that time the first people moved to the land now known as austria.
it is a neutral state, that means it does not take part in wars with other countries.
and was ruled by the house of habsburg for most of that period.
every piece of information is written down or put into a computer, so that a picture can be built up.
this is why archaeology is expensive and why it takes so long.
sometimes archaeologists find the bones of dead people and the things they used, or the houses they lived in.
archaeologists think it is important to understand the past, because so many people use the past to know where they come from.
they can study any time period.
for example, one might study the beginning of human life in africa, or one might study world war ii.
they search for sunken ships or cities that have been lost under the sea.
in many countries, governments and other groups of people protect important sites so that they will not be destroyed and so that visitors can always come and see them.
quite often as soon as the archaeologists have finished their work, the remains that they have found will be covered over, unless they are of very great importance.
it is a kingdom which contains all animals.
they eat plants or other animals.
animals are divided into groups as well.
the problem with this classification though is that most animals are invertebrates.
many animals live in this world.
some are big and some are small.
some live in water, others live on the ground and some animals can fly.
other animals eat only meat and are called carnivores.
animals that eat both plants and meat are called omnivores.
animals living in solitary do not have to share food with each other.
animals living in groups have better protection against becoming the prey of others.
in a colony, the animals work together in a special way and usually have a leader.
the animal kingdom is very diverse.
there are rules for how things move.
d'alembert have also proven that "f-ma=0 that means whatever may be the force acting on a body same amount of deaccelerating force is acting in it.
the idea of basic english is to use easy words to explain harder thoughts.
most of the words can be learned using pictures.
not all meanings of each word are allowed.
"odyssey" from ancient greece says that "as when a man besides a great fire has filled a sausage with fat and blood and turns it this way and that and is very eager to get it quickly roasted...".
this is a joke because it is impossible for someone to lift themselves up by their own bootstraps.
this means that the person had a beer, and also had a glass of whiskey.
anything that does not have enough money to pay all of its debt is insolvent.
if it applies for protection by law it may then be bankrupt.
all this provides is more time to work out a new deal between the owners and the people the business owes money.
that person will lose all but some basic things they own, but all the debt will go away.
this is a human rights problem in very many countries.
in the united kingdom, many different people say words in different ways.
in fact, people in some places in the united kingdom have spoken different languages in the past, and some places still speak those languages today.
in some places, the way people speak is changed by knowing the other language, such as gaelic.
the word being means the same as "person".
some people write stories or make movies about beings from other planets.
the city used to be known as "peking".
many people from different cities and countries come to beijing to look for better chances to find work.
the word berry is used for many different kinds of small fruits that has many seeds and can be eaten.
to boil water is to make it hot so that it begins to make bubbles and turns into steam.
the person also may have a fever.
when a man has hair only below the lower lip and above the chin, it is called a soul patch.
some men have a lot of hair and a big beard, and some have very little.
some animals also have hair like this, and people sometimes also call this hair a beard.
black can stand for strength and authority.
different kinds of the same disease.
the most common form of the disease is spread by a certain kind of flea, that lives on rats.
then there is an incubation period which can last from a few hours to about seven days.
it will result in a little fever.
the plague was not just carried by rats as some people assume.
from there the disease started to go new places in 1347.
there it killed half of the people in england.
this is a reason why so few jews caught the disease.
they do not know what happened to them.
many of those branches are seen as independent.
it is a branch of biology, and is also called plant biology.
they want to learn about how plants work.
the country is the fifth largest in the world by area.
people use this name because most of the uk is on the island of great britain.
the old greek writers heard these names and called the island "pritanni".
when the romans came to the island they called it britannia.
when some of these britons moved to live in north-west france their called their new country by the same name as their old one.
it is the study of the materials (things) that make up our bodies and everything in the world around us.
for a long time before that, people were trying to study these things to figure out how to do things like turn lead into gold, but no one ever did.
a computer is a device which takes orders as fast as you can give them to it and works as fast as it can to solve the orders.
a person may better do this by looking through all the cards, finding the one that goes in the first position (2 of diamonds), and putting it at the start.
this is because the meaning of the word "computer" has changed over time.
the length of day and night could be re-programmed every day in order to account for the changing lengths of day and night throughout the year.
one of the most important jobs that computers do for people is helping with communication.
blogs are used by many people to say what they want on the internet.
some people spend most of their time reading and writing blogs.
many people from all over the world use them.
some people use them to write about things that happen to them.
experts can use them to help people learn more.
many projects try to send working computers to developing nations so they can be re-used and will not become waste as quickly, as most people do not need to run new programs.
there are many different chinese languages but they all write using the same characters.
the lines are written working from the right to the left of the page.
a continent is a large area of the land on earth that is joined together.
other groups believe that it is a continent and that australia is just a part of this continent and not its own continent.
the corners of the other are the properties.
but its government was very weak.
the war later became part of world war ii.
people believe that colchester is oldest roman town that that is known in england.
the only part left is a gate that people still go to visit.
anyone can make a map, but there are people who spend their lives learning how to make complicated maps.
a contact network is a group of people who can all quickly get in touch with each other.
it does not guarantee any kind of help or access to knowledge other than that.
people also use it as a part of other dishes, the same way they eat breakfast sausage.
it can also be used in place of ground beef or pork.
it is very difficult to measure, and some think it should not be measured.
some think creativity is an important thing that makes humans different from apes.
linguistics might be more interested in how new words are created by culture, rather than in how existing ones are used in grammar.
this is separate from the instructional capital that might try to capture some of that in a patent or training system that helps others do what the individual leader or founder of the system can do.
the cathars believed that the world had been made by a bad god.
the believed that this bad god had taken them from the good god put them the world but inside their bodies there was a spirit and that spirit needed to return to the good god.
they were famous for a belief in a form of reincarnation and believed that when someone died the bad god would put that persons spirit in a new body.
latin was spoken only by the priests.
the pope also started to hold total authority over what was called "christendom".
he said any crusader who answered the call would be given the same rewards as a crusader who went to the holy land.
this would happen by a different sort of crusade, one that turned neighbor against neighbor and brother against brother.
people became terrified that their neighbors had said something about them, so they went and turned in their neighbors first.
it eventually got to the point where people were turning in the dead and corpses were dug up, burned and the property they had left their heirs was taken away by the roman catholic church.
if someone were turned in as a heretic, his property was taken by the church.
in the end the inquisition did wipe out most of the cathars though it took well over a hundred years to get all of them.
but some think that this is like saying that what is needed to explain a city is good enough to understand ecology in general.
these ideas were good enough to explain an island or watershed or continent that people lived on.
also a religious group is called a church.
in the early days of christianity people had to worship in secret.
the first places that were built for christian worship were small chapels that were cut into a rock where people could worship without being discovered.
these first churches were built on a similar plan to roman basilicas.
this plan was later used for the fine gothic cathedrals and churches that were built at the end of the middle ages.
this tradition comes from the fact that roman basilicas had a fountain for washing in front of the entrance.
this is also near the entrance of the church.
this is a symbol of the fact that it is welcoming the people into the christian church.
some churches may now have replaced their pews with chairs so that they can be moved about for different occasions.
if there are aisles along the side of the nave there will be pillars which hold up the roof.
in large churches or cathedrals there may be a row of little arches along the top of these pillars.
this is because the priests or monks were able to lean against them when they got tired if they had to stand up for a long time (it comes from the latin word for "mercy").
sometimes there are holes in the walls of the screen so that the congregation can see through.
if there is a recess in the wall it is called an aumbry.
the altar may be right at the east end of the church, but in larger churches or cathedrals it is often much further forward.
in that case the very east end is called an apse.
the design of churches changed a lot during the course of history.
it is difficult for the congregation to see and hear what is happening in the chancel.
a city is a place where many people live together.
a city has many buildings and streets.
many people live in cities because it is easy for them to find and do the things they want there.
there is no rule that is used all over the world to decide why some places are called "city" and other places are called "town".
one is because old cities often have a city wall, and most of the city is inside it.
another important reason is because the streets in old cities are often narrow.
if the city got too big, it was hard for a cart carrying food to get to the market place.
people in cities need food, and the food always has to come from outside the city.
in the us, the word city is often used for towns that are not very big.
they hoped the places would be great cities in the future.
when they started building the town they made street plans and called it great salt lake city (for the nearby great salt lake).
the whole area is often called a "metropolis" and can sometimes includes several small ancient towns and villages.
many other cities have grown in the same way.
these giant cities can be exciting places to live, and many people can find good jobs there, but modern cities also have many problems.
many people cannot find jobs in the cities and have to get money by begging or by crime.
the people who lived in the city were privileged over those who did not.
cities usually get this because they have a special number of people or are important.
usually we cook the food in some kind of pot or pan.
but people sometimes cook food by putting it directly into the fire, by wrapping the food in leaves before they put it into the fire, or holding it over a fire with a stick.
some foods are good to eat raw.
other foods are not good for the body when they are raw, so they must be cooked.
a person whose job it is to cook food may be called a cook or a chef.
to chat is to talk about ordinary things that are not very important.
people also use this word now for parts of the internet where we can talk with many different people at the same time.
a cup is also a unit of liquid measurement in some countries.
a cup can also be an award.
a crime is when a person does something that is against the laws of a country.
a person who does this is called a criminal.
the basic idea of what things are called crimes is that they are thought to be things that might cause a problem for another person.
but different countries have many different ideas of what things are crimes.
some things that are crimes in one country are not crimes in other countries.
many countries get their ideas of what things are crimes from religions.
in most countries, police try to stop crimes and to find criminals.
when the police find someone who they think might be a criminal, they usually hold the person in a jail.
if the court or judge decides that the person really did it, then he or she might have to pay a fine or go to prison.
sometimes the judge might decide that the criminal should be executed (killed).
when some criminals make money from crime, they try to stop the police finding out where the money came from by money laundering.
more than 70 nations are involved and over a billion us dollars will be spent on it.
it is now the third most important cereal crop in the world.
since a city has the most unsimple government problems, the word for this study is like that for city.
it tries to say what type of change it is and how big it is using functions at the exact moment at which the change is taking place.
but they were the first to design a system that describes how things change over time and can predict how they will change in the future.
the name "calculus" was the latin word for a small stone the ancient romans used in counting and gambling.
many amounts can be variables, which can change their value unlike numbers such as 5 or 200.
the speed of an object is how far it travels in a particular time.
this was a very long and hard process and had to be done each time people wanted to work something out.
they then chose points on either side of the point they were interested in and worked out tangents at each.
if the boxes are made narrower and narrower, then there are more and more of them, and the area of all the boxes becomes very close to the area of the shape.
waves are very important in the natural world.
calculus can be used to learn the path of the moon as it moves around the earth.
calculus can be used to find the path of the earth as it moves around the sun.
most people use coins as currency.
the different decorations on each side of a coin might be used to decide things randomly.
a person can throw the coin into the air and catch it.
before tossing the coin someone has to decide what each picture means.
because coins have been made for a very long time, some people collect old coins.
the crust of a piece of bread is the edge where it is harder and darker.
most are very far away from the sun, but some come near enough to earth for us to see at night.
some thought that they were fireballs sent from demons or gods to destroy the earth.
comets were also known to end wars and thought to bring famine.
although today we know a lot about comets, there will always be people who will be afraid when a comet returns.
it is said all christians are part of the church of christ wether or not they actually go to one
it can be soft or firm.
there are special pots for making cheese.
it tells how the country's leaders are to be chosen and how long they get to stay in office, how new laws are made and old laws are to be changed or removed, what kind of people are eligible to vote and what other rights they are guaranteed, and how the constitution can be changed.
the centre of a circle is the point in the very middle.
the radius of a circle is a line from the centre of the circle to a point on the side.
all points on the circle are at the same distance from the centre.
it is the only language to do that.
the country is made up of one big island and many smaller islands.
the taínos were the largest and most common of the three tribes.
some cubans who did not like the government and stayed were put in jail.
cost of living
cost of living is the amount of money it costs just to live in a certain place.
dance is when people move their body to music.
dance can be done by one person or two people or many people.
dancing is usually done while music is playing.
some people dance to express their feelings and emotions.
other people dance to feel better.
only men were accepted until 1681.
people who want to learn to dance can go to dance schools.
dance can be used as a form of communication between humans or humans and animals, it is a way of becoming an object or it is musical, mythological or a funny piece of work.
very often, it means a time limit that is set in place by an authority - for example, a teacher tells students that they must turn in their homework in by a certain time.
this is so the teacher is able to report fairly to his or her principal that every student had the same chance to do the work.
deadlines may also be set by a time horizon that comes from something that is not a human authority, but part of nature.
a way to remember this is that a time horizon is like the physical horizon where sunset happens and a time limit is a thing people set up to deal with this.
it can be used by people who speak any other language.
it is not a whole language by itself.
it is also a shorthand writing system – this means you can use it to write quickly.
it has two uses; to be a language and to be used for writing quickly.
dutton hoped that this would mean more people would learn it because they could use it for two reasons.
but speedwords is now being used by more people because they find it is good for working online.
this makes it easier to learn.
each word means only one thing.
this means you do not need to use different forms of the same word.
the words used in speedwords are the same as the words used in many other languages.
there are many other diseases that cause it.
food safety and hand washing can cut the risk of getting diarrhea.
some causes other than disease are stress and drinking too much alcohol.
there is one number for each dimension.
distance is how far one thing is from another thing.
displacement is the difference between a starting point and a finishing point.
some of these come close to being an encyclopedia, but an encyclopedia gives a lot of extra information about things (knowledge) and does not explain the use of the language.
it will explain how it is pronounced.
it will explain how the word is used.
this is not a problem for a word like “hippopotamus”, but a word like “put” has so many different meanings that a large dictionary may have a whole page or more to explain how it can be used.
it will also explain what language the word comes from (e.g.
when using a dictionary to find out how to say something in another language one has to be careful to choose the right word.
other languages are not like english: they will have different words for these different meanings.
a good dictionary will have a large list of these meanings to help people find the word they want.
new words are often brought into a language (e.g.
it might not be the easiest way to say what it is, but it is used because it is exact.
all three parts of the country have different languages and culture.
the country is surrounded by the sea except for jutland, the largest part of denmark.
this is the only part of denmark that is not an island.
the best time of the year for outdoor activities is the months of may and june until midsummer.
the main parts of the country, and most of the bigger islands, are connected by roads and railroads.
people have to go by boat or airplane to reach these islands.
many islands will never be reached by bridges, because they are too small or too far away.
if the island has too few people, bridges are often not built because it is expensive to build.
in earlier days, people could not travel anywhere unless they went by boat.
children are dressed up, and go from house to house begging for candy.
these are just some of the ways in which life forms die.
human death is very carefully tracked in case of a killing or something (like a disease) that may continue to kill other humans.
when people talk about things or events that lead to the death of an organism, those things or events are usually described as being deadly, or fatal.
there are special times in which people recover even though the heart has stopped for 30 minutes, such as near-drowning in very cold water.
there are about 50 countries in europe.
the name later was used for greece.
then as the rest of the area we call europe started to have cities and empires the whole of the area west of the urals got called this.
the word "εγκύκλιος" can also mean "general": perhaps the people who made the latin name "encyclopedia" did not understand the greek word well.
earth is the only place in the universe where life is known to exist.
the things that live on earth have completely changed its air or atmosphere.
some scientists think that the moon might have been made when a small planet, sometimes called "theia", crashed into earth and bit broke off - making the moon.
this protection made it possible for things to move from the deep ocean to the surface.
this long ago almost all land was in one place, called a "supercontinent".
this means it is made up of solid rock unlike a gas giant such as jupiter.
everything that lives on earth is on top of the crust.
the earth changes greatly from place to place.
it is kept there by gravity.
this mixture is often called "air".
it also helps to keep earth warm.
when we burn things it lets out a lot of carbon dioxide.
it might be very dangerous for life on earth if this continues.
as it rises it gets colder.
when gets cold enough it turns back into water again.
this causes the clouds and rain.
it is called the water cycle.
only six people in history have ever seen the other side of the moon.
it is often used in english to continue a list that is longer than what can be normally written.
experiments have been used for many years to help people understand the world around them.
for example, if we invent a theory that says "all houses are made of wood", we cannot say that it is true because all the houses we have seen are made of wood.
he did the experiment to see if lightning was made of electricity.
some of them think like platonists about what is good and bad.
this means that they think that what is right for me is whatever i say is right.
these philosophers do not think that ethics is the same for all people.
understanding ethics can help people decide what to do when they have choices.
many philosophers think that doing anything or making any choice is a part of ethics.
because each person has different experiences throughout their lives, they interpret their experiences differently.
that they themselves might experience something different at a different time or in different circumstances.
instead, they provide different ways of thinking and talking about the world.
most languages can be used to express the idea of a red apple.
an ethnic group is a group of people who are considered to be the same in some way.
sometimes almost all of the people in one country are of the same ethnic group, but not always.
it is a very deadly disease.
when people in a place get ebola, it is called an "outbreak".
then other people do not get the virus.
there are three main ideas that are useful for understanding economics.
people have many wants for goods, such as the want for food, for houses to live in, and a new car to drive.
this principle can be used by countries and is an important argument for the free trade between economics.
90 of these elements can be found in nature, and the others can only be made in laboratories.
it is a member of the united nations and the arab league.
most people live in areas around the coast of the mediterranean sea and along the nile river.
not many people live in the desert.
many famous people are from egypt.
it is either very cold or very hot, depending on the time.
it lets people make pages about many different things, and some people use it as a diary.
no words of more than two syllables.
it does this by counting the number of syllables in every word and the number of words in every sentence.
normal writing is usually between 7 and 8.
february is the second month of the year with 28 days in most years.
the meaning of the amethyst is sincerity.
all of the questions are supposed to be asked often and they all are about the same thing.
the best way to describe it is as the opposite of "slavery".
freedom does not always mean that people do as they want.
there are many things that may not let people do that.
a difficult problem is that sometimes people make bad choices.
they may make choices which stop them doing things they want to do later.
if they had not been free to make the bad choice, they "would" have be able to do the things they wanted later.
so, some people think that it is sometimes ok to control someone else, if it helps that person do things they want in the end.
for example, it is okay to say that a child who wants to get a good job must go to school, because when the child grows up, they will be able to get that job.
positive freedom is the ability to do all of the things that you can and want to do.
some people also say that we should stop a person driving if they drink because they might get hurt - even if the person "did" want to drink and drive.
or we should make a child go to school even if they do not want to get a good job in the end, because they might change their mind when they grow up.
it is only "positive freedom" if you control the person now to help them do something that they want to do later, and you know for sure that they want to do it.
these ideas are called "paternalism", where you control a person now to do something that you want them to do later, or that you think they should do.
today, freedom is felt by many to be something that all human beings have from birth, and a natural right.
this means that one is free by the fact that they are a human being.
it is things that have value, but do not do anything by themselves.
you cannot do anything with money but it still has value.
for example, some people buy and sell land but are not interested in doing anything with it.
some people think this sort of trade is bad because the land should be used and not just treated like money.
no human can ever be part of any of these "other" universes.
even if it is wrong, it raises the idea that living beings might have to see their universe as also living to be able to understand or care about it at all.
this idea is very appealing - which does not mean it is really "right".
some think both are a kind of religion.
food is material of animal or plant origin, eaten by living things to provide energy and nutrition.
not eating meat is called vegetarianism.
most people do not grow their own food, so they have to buy food that was grown by someone else.
but some people still grow most or all of their own food.
people may buy food and take it home to cook it, or buy food that is ready to eat from a street vendor, or in a restaurant.
many people do not have enough money to buy the food that they need.
bad weather or other problems sometimes destroy the growing food in one part of the world.
when people do not have enough food, we say that they are hungry.
if they do not eat enough food for a long time, they will become sick and die from starvation.
in areas where many people do not have enough food, we say that there is famine there.
if people do not eat the right foods, they can become sick.
if people do not eat enough protein, they get the disease called kwashiorkor.
that means they have rules what people should not eat, or how the food has to be prepared.
the word fine is used in english with two very different meanings.
often, if a court or a judge says that someone did a crime, then the person has to pay some money to their government.
this money is called a fine.
for example there are some businesses that will let us take books or videos to use in our homes for a few days.
but if we keep the book or video for too long, we might have to pay a fine to that business.
we can fry food in a small amount of butter or oil in a pan or in a lot of oil in a pot.
there are many different kinds of fish.
fish usually have scales and fins.
people eat many kinds of fish.
some people keep fish as pets.
they are often kept by groups of people in public ponds for their beauty and calming nature.
most kinds of fish have bones.
people catch fish with small nets from the side of the water or from small boats, or with big nets from big boats.
people can also catch fish with fishing poles and fishhooks with bait.
the part of the foot which joins it to the leg is called the "heel".
the bottom of the foot is called the "sole".
half the bones in our body are in the foot.
when an animal has soft feet, or feet with soft parts on the underside, we often call it a "paw".
if footwear is too big or small, it can be bad for the feet when the person wears the shoe, and also much later.
people have different traditions in different parts of the world for when to wear footwear.
in cultures where people always wear shoes, people sometimes think it is bad not to wear them.
it has the largest land area any of the members.
there are many cities in france.
in the north and west of france there are low hills and river valleys.
this means the temperature is about the same most of the year.
this was to try to become the most influential country in the eu.
it is also famous for its wine industry.
in north america some children think he lives near the north pole.
we know for sure that early form of finnish language was spoken in finland in the iron age.
first people killed wild animals and ate them, but did not farm their food.
those kind of people are called "hunter-gatherers".
some people started to farm to make some food 5200 years ago.
he was a god of sky and thunder.
this part of second world war is called continuation war in finland.
this is called war of lapland.
many people moved from farms to cities.
fruit is a type of food that is not always something one is able to eat.
it is part of a tree or bush or sometimes grown out of the ground like watermelons, that contains seeds.
when the fruit breaks apart, the seeds can get into mud and start growing.
a farm is a piece of land used to grow plants and/or raise animals for food.
people who grow these plants or raise these animals are called farmers.
land that is used to grow plants for food, or could be used to grow plants for food is called arable land.
its "inhabitants" are all the people and animals that live on it.
a geographer tries to understand the world and the things that are in it, how they started and how they have changed.
the word good can be an adjective that means something that is wanted.
something that is good is not bad.
goodness can mean that something is good, or it can mean the amount that something is good.
what goodness is has been talked about by philosophers who try to explain what goodness is.
they usually do this because that is what is normal in their family or the area where they live.
but it would not be easy to label if part of a song was licensed as gfdl and the rest was not, so this would not be allowed.
the gfdl has been criticized by many people who wish that it made it even easier for content to be re-used.
glass is a hard material that can be made in many shapes.
it is usually transparent, but it can also be made in colours.
it does not have to be made of glass, but can be made of any material, for example plastic.
glass is used to make lenses.
sometimes a window can be found with the thick end at the top of the window.
some believe that jesus was just a man that talked about god and taught people about god.
christians believe that god came to earth in the form of a man (jesus) to save humanity.
however, it is really only the worship of one god in different ways.
some hindus also believe that the spirit of god lives in everyone.
philosophers often try to understand gods through logic.
when philosophers talk about "god," they talk about a being like the one described above, but not about the god of any particular religion.
aristotle saw god as a being that makes everything happen, but is not influenced by anything else.
one of them is called god paradox.
it is a question about whether (an omnipotent) god can make a mountain that is so heavy he cannot lift it.
a ghost is considered to be the spirit of a dead person.
sometimes the ghost is the spirit of a person who was killed by enemies or who died in a scary way.
the ghost may stay on earth because he or she is angry due to some problem in life and wants to scare people or to harm his or her enemies.
sometimes the ghosts in these stories exist because of some problem the person had during life, that was not solved before he or she died.
many people claim to have seen or heard ghosts, and are called mediums.
many people believe they have seen ghosts.
often the ghost is said to appear as a feeling of cold and a light or a misty cloud, but sometimes people say they have seen ghosts that look more like people.
the ghost might also appear as they did at the time of their death, including any blood or injuries.
many people make up stories or urban legends.
it is one of the colors of the rainbow.
green is between the yellow and blue colors in a rainbow.
green is also seen as be able to stay the same and endurance.
"aqua" is associated with making someone feel better and protection, as well as being associated with good health from getting exercise by going swimming.
a special case of the last is in a wiki with a godking.
often this person can get others to believe what they say about what is right, without making any special effort to be fair to other views.
they also do things apart from searching.
that is 200 000 000 people.
it is said that the word "googol" was chosen as a name for this number because it sounded like baby talk.
(1 googol is 10 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000)
people have used many different gallons throughout history.
a government is a group of people that has the power to rule in a territory, according to the law.
the simplest idea of government is those who rule over people and land.
this may be as small as a community with some sort of board that looks after the goings on of those who live within it or something a little larger like a village or as big as a continent (like australia).
those people who rule the land can allow others to own it.
it is a deed by government that gives this right in the way that laws describe.
some think they have the right to hold land without government permission.
others think they can do so together as a group with others if they live in peace, without government.
almost every place on earth is connected to one and only one government.
for every place on earth there is a government that claims sovereign control over it.
tax is how government is paid for in most countries.
because government is run by people who can be greedy, many people think leaders must be elected by some kind of democracy.
there are many theories of how to run a government better, and keep people from hurting each other.
most law comes from traditions like that.
the ten commandments is one group of laws like that.
this makes the number of stars in the universe more than every grain of sand on every beach on earth.
it is hard to say if the galaxies we see are all that there really are.
it is even hard to say if "are" means anything if we can never see or measure them.
it means to measure the land.
it has grown from this to become one of the most important parts of mathematics.
history is the study of the past.
people can learn about the past by talking to people who remember things that happened in the past.
in old times people in different parts of the world kept different histories because they did not meet each other very often.
some groups of people never met each other.
it is having good food and water.
it is having good family and friends.
it is having a good spirit.
it is having a safe place to live.
it is different things for different people.
it changes in time for the same person.
it is the last state to join the united states.
it is the only state made only of islands.
others may have been there before him.
he united the separate small hawaiian kingdoms into one large kingdom in 1795.
it is also the largest city in hawaii and it has the most important harbor.
no one knows for sure when honolulu was first settled or when the name was first used.
he named the harbor fair haven.
the largest city on the island is hilo.
it is on the rainy east side of the island.
the words were written by king david kalakaua, the music by prof.
we think they came by boat from the islands of what is now indonesia.
they lived in all parts of australia.
first they found the north and west coast.
he thought it would be a good place to settle.
for the first few years they did not have much food, and life was very hard.
others went north and found queensland.
soon more towns and cities were started.
many more people wanted to come to australia.
soon few were left, and they were made to live on small reserves.
the people in australia wanted to run their own country, and not be told what to do from london.
but now there was thousands of people and many of them had never been to britain, an eight month journey away by sea.
if people in one colony wanted to buy or sell things to people in another colony, they had to ask permission.
so they passed a law that only people from britain or other european countries could come to australia.
australia was also one of the first places in the world where women could vote.
when the war ended, australia felt that it needed many more people to fill the country up and to work.
so the government said it would take in people in europe who had lost their homes in the war.
some australians began to think of their country as being a part of asia for the first time.
in the 1960s and 1970s australia became one of the richest countries in the world, because it could mine a lot of iron and other things from the ground that other countries wanted to buy.
but it still has many problems.
history of spain
britain sent its own troops to defend spain since it was so weak.
before this, several different kings had ruled different countries in what is now called spain.
spain sent many soldiers and businessmen to north and south america, and they took over very large parts of those two continents.
they found damaged and dying societies with people who had lost some of their most important leaders and thinkers.
in many ways it was held together as a reign of terror.
today we would say that these people were guilty of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.
many church people who had the power to speak out at that time, did so, and they said many of the same things as we would say today.
in the 18th century, there was doubt over who should become king of spain; this doubt led many of the kings of europe to fight to become king of spain.
it also made spain lose its empire in north and south america; all of the parts of that empire became their own countries, or were taken over by other countries such as the united states of america.
britain sent its own troops to defend spain since it was so weak.
there was not much peace in spain during the first part of the 20th century.
some spaniards tried to set up a government chosen by the people (a democracy), and they made the king of spain leave the country.
but the king did not rule as a dictator; instead, he chose to set up a democracy.
height is the distance between the lowest end and highest end of an object.
human death is the end of sharable human personal experience - if anything happens to us after death, we are not able to clearly communicate it.
such rituals as a seance claim to be able to speak to the dead but this is not claimed to be very reliable, even by those who do them very often.
if there is some other part to life such as soul, that could continue without a body (afterlife), move into another body (reincarnation), or just go away.
the medical view of the body is that it is like an animal body and in some ways like a machine.
this is a powerful way to see the body because it lets it be "diagnosed" and sometimes "fixed".
it is considered a very bad thing to let animals taste human flesh, or to have the experience of killing one.
but this is no longer common, in part because disease like kuru can be passed this way.
hiding a human death is considered very bad - almost as bad as homicide itself.
dealing with dead bodies and their property.
finding the cause of any human death, and stopping a similar death from happening to someone else, are the main reasons people look into "human morbidity", or let dead bodies be cut open and looked at in an autopsy.
the autopsy helps find out if someone killed the person on purpose, or tried to hurt them, or if they died from a sickness.
to prepare for their own death, humans can write a last will and testament to be clear about who gets their property.
it can also save the lives of others by making organ transplants possible.
old women sometimes carry guns in case their husband's relatives come to throw them on the funeral fire.
christianity has a special focus on death because of the state killing of jesus christ by the romans.
in christianity itself it is thought to prove that jesus himself was really god and so could lose his body to show something and still have power.
often these excuse behaviours that might be hated if they did not have the ritual.
very much of what happens at a human death is ritual.
this makes it much easier for their family after they die, since there is no longer the ability to clearly communicate the wish.
the first of these was to record everything remembered about the u.s.
this discipline has changed history since we have so many more first person accounts of the times, and made social history much more standard.
the human body is the body of a person.
the body is a thing that can be hurt or killed.
some people study the human body.
they look at where it is different from or the same as other animals' bodies.
these animals can be alive today.
some people study how the human body works and lives in its environment.
some people study what people think about their body.
the human body and other animals.
scientists think that the human body is very much like other animals.
the animal that is alive now that is closest to humans is the chimpanzee.
this needs a large amount of energy to get started, and is not easy to do yet.
they found that it was in the sun before it was found on earth.
it is also used in some kinds of light bulbs.
having no hair is called baldness.
humans and some other animals have lost much of their hair through evolution, and some animals, such as the elephant and the whale, have almost none at all.
people have been interested in head hair for hundreds of thousands of years.
sometimes society makes rules to control the amount of hair, for example by not allowing people to cut their hair or beards.
men often lose some of their hair as they grow older.
its name comes from the fact that hair loss almost always follows the same pattern.
it begins by hair falling out first from the front and sides of the head, and thinning from the top of the head, usually until it is all gone.
after a while, all that may be left is a fringe of hair running above the ears and around the lower back of the head.
people have tried to find cures for hair loss for thousands of years.
some doctors do hair transplants, where they take tiny plugs of hair from areas like the back of the neck and plant them in the bald spots on the head.
it is in the east of the country and built on the river liffey.
the world wide web was created
some parents block parts of the internet they think are bad for children to see.
its official name is the italian republic'".
italy is a peninsula, meaning it is surrounded by the sea on all sides apart from one (its north side).
the tiber river runs through the city of rome.
people from italy are called italians.
the official language of italy is italian and in some area german or french.
latin was one of the first languages of italy.
italy makes more wine than any other country.
if is a word to describe a statement where one thing depends on something else.
an island is a piece of ground that is surrounded by water.
water is all around an island.
an "immigrant" is a person that leaves his or her own country or region and an "emmigrant" is a person that comes from other country or region.
an idiom is a word or phrase which means something different from what it says - it is usually a metaphor.
because idioms can mean something different from what the words mean it is difficult for someone not very good at speaking the language to use them properly.
some idioms are only used by some groups of people or at certain times.
idioms are made of normal words that have a special meaning known by almost everyone.
slang is usually special words that are known only by a particular group.
to learn a language a person needs to learn the words in that language, and how and when to use them.
but people also need to learn idioms separately because certain words together or at certain times can have different meanings.
in order to understand an idiom, one sometimes needs to know the culture the idiom comes from.
to know the history of an idiom can be useful and interesting, but is not necessary to be able to use the idiom properly.
the academic one is for people who want to go to university.
the general one is for people who want to do other training or want to get work experience.
the ink does not fall out of the cylinder as it sticks to the sides of the tube.
many different languages are used in india, so there is no one language called "indian".
the europeans made a mistake and thought they were going to india, so they called the people "indians".
the pint is the name of a unit of liquid measurement in some countries.
the imperial pint is still used to measure beer in the countries of the old british empire.
it is usually not used today for anything else.
(the list of the 21 other official names can be found here).
this means that it is bigger than argentina but smaller than australia.
it is the official language of the union.
both these languages are more than 3000 years old.
there are many rivers in india.
because of some of the deserts of india, all of india gets rain for four months of the year called the monsoon.
the study of this system is psychoneuroimmunology.
no matter how many times 10 is added, 10 more can still be added.
actual infinity is something that we cannot imagine or put a value on in our system of concepts.
one of those records said there were many small countries which had wars between them and later a country, ruled by a queen, became the strongest and peace came.
they did not try to make a strong military, but a strong economy.
although america helps protect japan, some people living near the bases do not like the soldiers being there because of serious problems the soldiers sometimes make.
jargon is a special way to use words that are shared only by a certain group of people.
they have different meanings to the people using them than their everyday meaning.
often this is the first letter of each word.
he was a jew and came from a town called nazareth in galilee, in the country that is today called israel.
stories about the life of jesus have been recorded by different writers.
the best known are four books called the gospels.
the "gospels" were written by people who followed jesus and believed in him.
they usually only mention his execution or problems between the roman government and his followers; they do not talk about his life.
they also celebrate the time that the gospels say he died and was raised from the dead as the holiday of easter.
nearly all other writing about jesus is based on these four books.
the government wanted every single family to have their name taken down to be taxed, so everyone had to go back to the place where they came from.
joseph came from the small town of bethlehem, near jerusalem, so even though mary was close to giving birth to her baby, they had to travel, with thousands of other people.
luke tells us that the shepherds who were minding the sheep on the hillside came in to see the baby, and went away singing thanks to god for the newborn king.
in "the gospel of matthew" it says that wise men from another country saw a new star in the sky and came to find the young jesus because they knew that the "messiah" was going to be born under a star, and that the star was a sign that jesus was born to be a king.
he taught that god alone was the true king, and that people should love god and love each other as the hebrew bible told them to do.
he also set people free from evil spirits.
he went to jerusalem, where many people were visiting the city for a holy day.
when they heard that he was coming, they greeted him as if he was a king.
they thought perhaps he would free them from the roman rule, but jesus rode into jerusalem on a donkey, as a sign that he came in peace.
jesus did a lot of things that upset the jewish religious leaders.
he often showed disrespect for customs that the jews had kept for many centuries.
jesus saw a man lying on a mattress.
carrying the mattress on the sabbath was against religious custom, so the religious leaders argued with jesus about it.
they then watched everything he did, and remembered all the things that were against the religious customs.
he became angry at what he saw.
jesus chased away all the people who were selling things.
he said the chief priests and scribes had turned the temple into a den of thieves because they were making money from the poor and taking away homes from poor women who had no other way to pay for the temple worship.
the temple leaders were angry and wanted to kill him.
they told the roman government that jesus wanted to become the king of the country and take it over.
the roman governor thought that jesus should be set free.
the roman soldiers killed jesus by crucifixion; they nailed him to a cross by his arms.
this was a common way for the romans to kill rebels and criminals.
jesus' body was buried in a tomb which belonged to one of his followers.
on the day after the sabbath, early in the morning, women came to wash the body and treat it with spice and perfumed oil.
but the gospels say that the body of jesus was gone, and an angel sat by the tomb and said "he is risen from the dead!"
jesus did not write these letters.
there is also lots of advice for running churches and families.
there are many christians who believe what paul taught about jesus but who do not agree with some of paul's advice.
whether or not jesus is god has been argued about for a long time.
in jesus' own time, many jews became very angry at jesus for saying that he was the "son of god" and also because his followers said he was the "messiah".
most jews do not believe this.
most christians believe that jesus' death on the cross allows all people to be forgiven by god for their sins (bad things they have done).
most christians believe that if a person asks god to forgive them he will do so, and they will get to live forever with him in heaven.
christians believe that, by the teaching of the bible, jesus was not only truly god but also truly human and that this was part of god's plan to bring humans closer to understanding him.
matthew has borrowed these words from the old testament where they are often used to show that humankind is very far from god.
in psalm 8, the writer, king david, asks god "what is man and the son of man, that you should care so much and give him such wonderful power over the earth and all its creatures?"
like king david, in psalm 8, jesus is making a difference between his ordinary human life and his great power as the "son of god".
prayer could be done anywhere, but sacrifices were done at the temple.
they would put their hands on the animal to lay their sins on it.
then the animal would be killed, as a punishment for the sin.
when jesus drove the traders out of the temple, they were the people who sold lambs and doves, and the people who exchanged roman money into special temple money.
part of christian belief is that jesus christ did not just come as a human person so that he could teach a better way of life.
christians believe that, unlike ordinary people, jesus was completely pure and free from sin, but that when he died on the cross, he took on himself all the sins of every person in the whole world, like the lamb sacrificed in the temple.
based on john's gospel, christian teaching is that the death and resurrection of jesus are the sign of his power to forgive the sins of any person who turns to him and truly asks for forgiveness.
the bible says that sinners who are forgiven should try to live a "new life" and not go back to their sinful behaviour.
"god loved the world so much that he gave his only son, so that, whoever believes might not die but have eternal life."'
but if we tell our sins humbly to god, then he has promised to listen and to forgive our sins and make us clean from all our badness."
from the first letter of john.
they believe that jesus was an ordinary, but very good person, a teacher and perhaps a prophet.
gandhi worked hard in his life to make the followers of all these religions respect each other.
this is how many people see jesus, too - a teacher who said that all people were neighbours and that jews, romans, greeks, samaritans and other people should all live in peace with each other.
some people believe jesus was a prophet of god.
among these people are muslims who follow the teaching of a book called the qur'an.
they believe that jesus cannot be part of god, because there is only one god.
muhammad taught that jesus did not die on the cross, but that he went up to heaven without dying.
even though jesus was a jew and his teaching came out of the jewish religion, most jewish people do not believe that jesus was the "messiah" that is promised in the jewish scriptures.
in the gospels, it tells that jesus made the jewish teachers very angry with his teachings.
it says that part of their anger was because he told them they were "hypocrites" which means that they were pretending to live good lives but were really using the laws of their own religion to cheat people.
in the gospels, the other reason that they became angry was that jesus acted as if he was the "messiah", and said he was the "son of god".
this meant that he was either a terrible liar, that he was mad and just imagined it, or that it was true.
but jesus did not seem to be mad.
so that left only two choices.
if jesus was lying, then he was doing something badly against the jewish religion.
it was because of the claims that jesus was the "son of god" that some of the jewish leaders wanted him killed and they handed him to the roman rulers.
the romans didn't care if jesus said something that was against the jewish beliefs.
but they knew that people had also said that jesus was "king of the jews".
jesus as part of a false story.
ideas have been put forward that the whole of the gospel writing about jesus is just a good story or myth and that jesus perhaps never existed.
others have claimed that jesus was really married to his follower, mary magdalene and that the early church leaders deliberately hid this information because it did not fit with the way that they wanted jesus to be remembered.
the gospel of philip, which is a book of teachings from the 3rd century, talks about mary magdalene in a way that has sometimes been thought to mean that she was his wife.
they say that these early writings never say clearly that jesus was married.
jesus as part of an old tradition.
they also show that christianity holds its main holy days at a time when there was already a roman or jewish festival such as easter at the time of the passover.
whether or not that person was called jesus, their ideas were so powerful that they changed the world.
this is the order in which they are arranged in the new testament of the bible, but scholars think that it is not the order in which they were written.
the four gospels all tell the story of the life of jesus, but they do it from four different points of view, because they were written by different people and each writer had reasons to tell it in a different way.
these changes are said to have happened at different times, in different ways and for different reasons.
other differences that can be found in versions of the gospels are mostly small and do not make a difference to what is known about the life of jesus and his teaching.
he was a jewish man that was hated by other jews because he worked for the roman rulers as a tax collector.
matthew tells that one day jesus saw him sitting at his desk in the market place and said "follow me!".
he also starts off by giving a list of jesus' ancestors because this was important to jewish readers.
the apostle luke was greek and a friend of the apostle paul.
luke came to know about jesus from the "disciples".
luke writes about the birth and the childhood of jesus and he says "mary kept all these things in her heart and thought about them."
luke was not a jew and he writes in a way that is easy for other people who are not jews to understand.
he explains jewish customs and laws.
john writes with one particular idea in mind.
he wants to prove to the reader that jesus is god's way of saving humans from the terrible problem of sin or "evil".
the gospels tell many of the stories that jesus told when he was teaching people about the way that god loved them and the way they should live.
in the first story it is shown how much god loves his people and in the second story is shown how people should love each other.
they would both get a share of his money, when he died.
he took the money to the city, and spent it all on parties with his friends.
soon he had none left to feed himself.
he got a job caring for pigs, but he was almost starving.
please let me be a servant in your house!'"
as he went home, he did not know that his father looked out for him, every day.
when his father saw him coming, he ran along the road to put his arms around his son.
please let me be a servant in your house!"
when the elder brother heard all this, he was angry and said "i'm a good son to you, but you never even gave me one little goat to have a party with my friends!"
i love you greatly, and and all i have is yours, but my son who was lost is now found!
my son who seemed to be dead is alive!
jesus said that this is the way god loves and forgives his people, when they ask for forgiveness.
near the jews lived the samaritans.
a jewish priest came along and saw him.
at last a samaritan came along with a donkey.
when he saw the wounded man he stopped.
he washed his wounds with wine and olive oil.
then he put him on his donkey and took him to the nearest inn.
jesus said to the people who were listening "which one of these people acted like a good neighbour?"
this is because it is very big and made up of gas.
at some times jupiter can be the third brightest object in the night sky.
this is because it is made of gas.
because of all the gas near the core, it gives off more heat than it gets from the sun.
it is a huge storm which is bigger than the entire earth.
it has been known about for just under 200 years and possibly even longer.
storms can last for hours or as long as hundreds of years in the case of the great red spot.
it is also known as a "magnetosphere".
the strength of the field is enough to be a serious danger to any spacecraft travelling past or to jupiter.
the orbit of a planet is the time and path it takes to go around the sun.
this is five times the distance between earth and the sun.
this causes it to have no seasons, for example summer or winter.
because of that, people have always been able to see it from earth.
it only went to jupiter after it had finished its main mission.
cassini also found a moon and took a picture of it but it was too far away to show the details.
only 13 of these were first seen from earth because the rest are too small.
it has over 400 volcanoes, more than three times as many as earth.
it was one of the first religions to believe in only one god (monotheism).
he made a list of 13 principles that include the basic beliefs of judaism.
there are various important actions in judaism.
many of these 613 commandments can not be done now, because the holy temple in jerusalem was destroyed.
religious jews believe that moses brought the ten commandments and the torah down from mount sinai.
they also believe that there is another part of the torah besides the 5 books of moses.
it explains how to follow the laws written in the 5 books.
traditional jews believe that god gave the written torah and the oral torah to moses and that moses told it to the jewish people, and that it is the same today as it was back then.
traditional jews also believe that all of the commandments must still be followed today.
it is considered good in judaism to talk about the commandments and to try to understand how to follow them.
some rules are still being argued about.
there is no single leader of judaism who can decide how to follow the commandments or what to believe.
even though jews believe different things and they disagree about the rules, they are still one religion and one people.
the ten commandments are special because they were heard by all of the jewish people at mount sinai.
one of the commandments is to keep the jewish sabbath or "shabbat".
shabbat is a day of rest to thank god for making the earth.
many jews go to their temple or synagogue to pray on shabbat.
no one goes far from home.
they invite guests for dinner and for lunch.
they go to synagogue and visit friends and have special meals.
jews who follow the religious rules called "kashrut" only eat some types of food that are prepared by special rules.
they usually can not eat in non-kosher restaurants or in the home of someone who does not keep kosher.
sometimes, this makes it hard to visit people or to do business.
it is important to understand that this is part of their religion.
it is best to ask them individually.
for a very long time, all jews believed the same basic things about judaism.
about 200 years ago, a small group of jews in germany decided to stop believing in many parts of judaism and try to become more "modern" and more like germans.
some do not believe in keeping most of the laws.
names are very important in judaism.
many jews believe that a name not only tells you who someone is, but also tells you something about them.
names of god are very special in judaism, so jews do not write them or speak them fully but use other words instead.
it is the word jews use most often when not praying to talk about god.
this tells us that god is the creator and that god rules the world with just laws.
the two names above are so special that orthodox jews use these names only when they pray and read the torah.
they do this because god's name is so holy they are not allowed to throw away a piece of paper with "god" written on it.
no one knows where the name came from, or what exactly it means.
the jewish scriptures say that judaism began with a man named "abram" who lived in the city of ur.
he believed that there was really only one god who was not a statue.
the torah tells that god spoke to abram and told him to leave ur with his family and move to canaan, were he started a new religion.
god told him that his name would be changed to abraham.
the midrash also says that angels taught abraham a new holy language, which jews believe is the language today known as hebrew.
the pharaoh became worried that the jews would take over, so he made them slaves.
god told the hebrew leader moses to help free them.
god sent many terrible punishments to the egyptians to convince their pharaoh to free the hebrews.
finally, the pharaoh let the hebrews go free, but then decided to send the egyptian army after them.
the hebrews escaped when god made the waters of the red sea open a path for them.
the waters then returned and drowned the egyptian army.
the torah says that after this, moses met with god on mount sinai and received the ten commandments and the torah from god.
they fought many wars against other peoples in the area.
they were allowed to go back to judah again when babylon was conquered by persia.
the jews did not like the roman government or customs, and often made trouble for the romans.
this time is called the diaspora, when jews spread around the world.
they lived in many other countries.
even today, jews that do not live in israel are often said to live "in the diaspora".
the jewish people have always believed that they have a special mission from god.
they do things in their own ways, such as having special rules about food and eating, not working on the shabbat, keeping their own holidays, and not marrying people from other religions.
because of this, people in many different times and countries have thought that the jews were strange, and maybe dangerous.
many countries made laws that the jews could not work in some jobs or live in some places.
sometimes jewish people were killed because of their religion.
they treated the jews very badly, because they said that the jews caused most of the problems for germany in the first world war.
before they were killed, many of the jews were made to be slaves, and some of them were forced to help in the killing and slavery of the others.
most of them did not want to live in a jewish country.
israel is the only country in the world where most people are jews and where hebrew is the main language.
jewish history continues today in both israel and the diaspora.
there are smaller numbers of jews living in other parts of the world.
many famous people have been jewish or have come from jewish families.
a king is a male who rules a country because of inheritance.
a king usually comes to power when one of his parents dies.
the wife of a king is called a queen.
if a country has a king or a queen, that means it is a monarchy.
a country which a king or queen rules is called a kingdom.
if someone understands an idea or is aware of something, then he or she has "knowledge" of it.
if someone has "know-how" it means that they can put "knowledge" to work in doing or building something.
knowledge comes from being in an environment, having some experience there, and then sharing what was learned - so that others do not have to be in that environment or have that experience to "know" what someone else knows.
it is the main city on the island.
the island is planned to be given back to the hawaiian people.
it is made up of the whole island and waters out to two miles (3.2 km) from shore.
the act of killing a living thing can be said to have happened when an outside force, usually another life form, has done something to cause it to die.
when a human being is killed by the action or fault of another human being, this event is called a homicide.
but human language is the key meaning of "language."
a person who is able to speak, use and understand words from more than one tongue (language) is said to be multilingual.
gestures (communication through hand movements) are one way people can try to make themselves understood when they cannot speak in the same language.
there is also sign language, which is used to speak to people who cannot hear.
during their vacation, some people travel to a different region or country, and stay at a hotel so that they can do things they could not do near home.
other people prefer to spend their vacation time at home in their own community.
the study of life is called biology and people who study life are biologists.
death is the end of life in a living system, or in a part of it.
the law is a system of rules that people are supposed to follow in a society or a country.
the courts and police enforce this system of rules and punish people who break the laws, such as by making them pay a fine or other penalty or sending them to jail.
the "rule of law" is the law that says that government can only legally use its power in the way the government and the people agree.
common law is based on the decisions made by judges in past court cases.
religious law is law based on religious beliefs or books.
the history of law is closely connected to the development of human civilisations.
it has moral rules such as the ten commandments, that tell people what acts are not permitted.
the highest courts usually have the power to remove laws that are unconstitutional (which go against the constitution).
civil society is the people and groups that are not part of government that try to protect people against human rights abuses and try to protect freedom of speech and other individual rights.
zamenhof thought that one common language would join these groups and stop fights between them.
his first language was said to be polish.
list of countries
list of main current country rulers
it had a lot of these in 1854.
the island is almost a circle in shape and is 18 miles wide in the longest direction.
that was when the growing of pineapple was slowly coming to an end in the islands.
it is the year when an extra day is added to the gregorian calendar used by most of the world.
the extra day is added to the month of february.
but a year is not a leap year if can be evenly divided by 100 and not by 400.
these are pretty good ways to make leather
the laws of most countries say that you are only allowed to drive a car if you have a licence.
in many countries, if a person tries to do something without the correct licence to do it, he might have to pay a fine or go to prison.
a chain is made of many pieces of metal; each piece is a link.
but today people also use the word link in a new way.
most libraries are public and let people take the books to use in their home.
there are a few "copyright libraries" which have a copy of every book which has been written in that country.
stories are kept in alphabetical order by the last name of the person who wrote them, the author.
books about other things are often given a special number, that refers to what they are about.
they can teach people how to find books and use the library.
as works in the same way as example 2 - comparing two things using either the word "like" or the word "as" is called making a simile ("as big as an elephant").
it may be better to use the word "as" for this to stop confusion with example 1.
the way a legislature is supposed to work can usually be found in the constitution of that state or country.
the way a council works can usually be found in the area's "charter".
since it makes all of the original equations valid, that is, the value on left side of the equals sign is exactly the same as the value on the right side for both equations.
this means it is the city with the most number of people in europe.
another famous old part of greater london is westminster, which was always a different city from the city of london.
they are usually associated with the lemon.
if they stay on the tree for a long time they turn yellow.
a common saying in the u.s.
these rules leave out information that isn't important so that a single rule can cover many situations.
the reason can include using certain other rules that everyone agrees are correct, which are called "axioms".
a rule that has a proof is sometimes called a "theorem".
sometimes these ideas and rules are found in the real world after they are studied in mathematics.
this has happened many times in the past.
this means that studying the rules and ideas of mathematics can help us know the world better.
history and the world of mathematicians.
it was named after the war god (mars) and the romans thought that it was a lucky time to begin a war.
music is an art that puts sounds together in a way that people like or find interesting.
someone who is making music is called a musician.
music started many thousands of years ago.
early people also discovered that when they cut off the horns of animals they had killed and blew through them, they could make interesting sounds.
it is not known what the earliest music of the cave people was like.
some architecture, even some paintings, are thousands of years old, but old music could not survive until people learned to write it down.
much of the music in the middle ages (roughly 450-1420) was folk music played by working people who wanted to sing or dance.
there was also plenty of music not written for the church, such as happy dance music and romantic love songs.
the form of a piece of music was very important at this time and becoming very popular.
music had to have a nice shape.
they used these new instruments to make new sounds.
it is very useful to be able to read and write music because this is how composers (who may have lived a long time ago) can tell the person playing their music how they want their music to be played.
it can be seen from the shape whether the music goes up or down.
this all helps someone to become a good musician.
this means that to learn a song, they listen to other people singing it, or to a recording, until they know how the tune of the song goes.
people can enjoy music by listening to it.
sometimes it is good to listen more closely to music: by trying to hear the different instruments and what types of notes the instruments are playing.
anyone can make up his or her own pieces of music.
someone can make up a piece that tells a story, or just find a nice tune and think about ways it can be changed each time it is repeated.
it is one of the largest palace in all of western europe.
but the king and his family do not live there anymore; they live in a smaller palace, and only use the royal palace for important events, like meeting other kings and presidents.
the macadamia nut is the fruit of a tree that first came from the east coast of australia.
there are more than one kind of macadamia trees, but only one kind is grown for food.
the island is 38 miles long and 10 miles across.
also on the island is kalaupapa, which is a place for people who have a diease called leprosy.
there are many kinds of money in the world.
most of the time a state or a government prints paper money and makes coins at a special place called a mint.
money is what you use to buy things.
the idea of trading things is very old.
a long time ago, people did not buy or sell with money.
instead, they traded one thing for another to get what they wanted or needed.
each would trade a little of what he had with the other, and support the people on his farm.
other things that were easier to carry around than cows also came to be held as valuable, and were used as trade items, such as jewelry and spices.
when people changed from trading in things like cows and wheat to using money instead, they needed things that would last a long time, still be valuable, and could be carried around.
this idea soon spread to greece, the rest of the mediterranean, and the rest of the world.
if someone sells a cow for money, he can save that money away until he needs it.
he can always leave it to his children when he dies.
it can last a very long time, and he can use it at any time.
not every cow is as good as another cow.
so if a person trades cows for wheat, he might have a hard time arguing over how much wheat each cow is worth.
both times, it did not work well, and had to be stopped because the banks kept running out of coins to pay on the notes.
today, most of what people think of as money is not even things you can hold.
multiplication between numbers is said to be commutative - when the order of the numbers does not influence the value of the product.
the faith emphasizes unity and defense of fellow muslims, so it is common for these nations to cooperate.
some might even have never started.
this sometimes makes it very difficult or dangerous to make anti-government statements.
but in some countries they have been forced to do so against their will.
this is one of the things that causes tension between the western world and that of muslims.
like the arabs, this small group of jews thought the way israel was created was not right.
a lot of things changed in that year.
in many ways the events of 1979 led to the events of 2001.
some say it is much over-used.
technology is often easier to make if people accept a mechanistic paradigm - but it may be harder to say why it does not work, if one believes in these ideas.
both tried to work from what should or must be, instead of what experiment seemed to show.
a first language is the language that a person learned as a baby, normally from his or her parents.
many people also learn another language - when they do this, it is called their "second language".
models of nature
but without models of nature we do not know who, and cannot say how much is harmful.
they matter in law because harms can be proven to have been done in a court.
a forest is very hard to bring back to life, once it is degraded.
smaller models of bits of nature help to understand how much must be left, so future generations can use nature too.
this is part of the reason to use ecology borders in politics, since people who do not live inside the border do not see or make the same distinctions about nature.
the value of earth as a living thing was much more than we could ever afford to replace with our own technology.
pricing all the value of earth to humans gives a huge number - which proves the pricing is right, since, we must put a high price on anything we have no way to replace.
the hair that grows on the sides of the face and chin of some men is called a beard.
some men have a lot of hair and a big mustache, and some have very little.
some animals such as walruses also have hair like this, and people sometimes also call this hair a mustache.
a mile is one of several measures of distance.
it contains less fat than butter, so is often chosen instead of it.
it is named for the very bright band of stars that are best seen in the southern hemisphere.
since the sun and earth are about three quarters of the way to the edge, and since there are few stars at the edge, there is a very big difference in brightness.
at this time there is great danger.
that time was almost exactly when spain invaded.
their empire was destroyed and became part of what is now peru.
a flying bird or a walking person are moving, because they change where they are from one place to another.
microscopes make things seem larger than they are, from 10 times larger to about 1000 times larger.
it only takes 88 days for it to go around the sun.
he saw what he called "canali", which were ditches dug for water to pass through.
some famous stories were written about this idea.
it has to be held at the right distance between the eye and the object.
it is the study of value or quality.
usually they are at one of the corners of the mosque.
very often, it is also the highest point in the area around the mosque.
they only occupied a small part of the roof near the mihrab.
this makes it possible to allow as many people as possible to pray.
all people must wash themselves before they pray.
most of the time, this is in the center of the courtyard.
this is also known as wudhu/wudu.
at least part of the food is provided by members of the community.
these are done in the morning before dawn, before the first prayer of the day, called fajr.
some rules are valid all over the world, like the one that says that no shoes should be worn in the prayer hall.
it is generally seen as good to have someone who leads the prayers.
the person who usually leads the prayers is called imam.
he must be a free and honest man.
he should also be an authority when it comes to answering questions on religion.
women are allowed to lead prayers for congregations where there are only women.
there are other rules that also apply to those who enter the mosque, even though they do not want to pray there.
those praying and those visiting are expected to be clean.
men and women pray in different parts.
islamic law requires men and women to be separated in the prayer hall.
however, there are also many other places in the west as well as the islamic world where non-muslims are welcome to enter mosques.
an important part of being muslim, or just being part of the mosque, is taking care of people who need help.
a mammal is any animal that produces and feeds its young with milk and is warm-blooded; the heat they need to live is made inside their body.
numbers are used when things are measured.
numbers are used to study how the world works.
mathematics is a way to use numbers to learn about the world and make things.
the base ten number system is common because people have ten fingers and ten toes.
there are 10 different symbols used in the base ten number system.
a symbol for a number is made up of these ten digits.
another number system is more common for machines.
the binary number system is also called the base two number system.
when dealing with larger numbers than this there are two different ways of naming the numbers in english.
under the 'long scale' a new name is given every time the number is a million times larger than the last named number.
another scale is the 'short scale' under which a new name is given every time a number is a thousand times larger than the last named number.
some people call these counting numbers.
these numbers are sometimes written as +1 to show that they are different from the negative numbers.
we call one point on this line zero.
we cannot call this point one, as there is already a point called one.
a drawing of a number line is below.
if people add a negative number to another this is the same as taking away the positive number with the same numerals.
if they take away a negative number from another this is the same as adding the positive number with the same numerals.
for instance if we have a square which has sides of 1 meter, the distance between opposite corners is the square root of two.
this number is the same for every circle.
real numbers is a name for all the sets of numbers listed above
there is no number in the real numbers which when squared makes the number -1.
the first to actually prove there were transcendental numbers was joseph liouville.
the meaning of the topaz is fidelity.
a national anthem is a song that the people of a country use to remember and respect their country.
to name something is to give it a name.
in many cultures, there are rules and customs about how to give a person a name.
number of parts of a name
in some cultures, a person can have any number of name parts.
relations with names of parents and other relatives
in other cultures, a person has the same name as his or her father, but the name is in a different place.
in other cultures, a name shows what the parents hope their child will be like.
a baby may be given a name wisdom because parents hope the baby will be a wise girl or boy.
in some languages and cultures, you can tell if a word is a person's name or not by just looking at the spelling or listening to its pronunciation.
here are some things that are often found in japanese names today.
number of parts of a name
one is the family name and the other is the given name.
only some members of the royal family do not have a family name.
relations with names of parents and other relatives
a newborn baby gets a family name from their parents.
the parents have the same family name.
names of people change when they marry and divorce.
it is a custom in many parts of the world that women change their family name to that of their new husband when they marry.
it has a land area of 70 sq.
it is the oldest of the eight main islands.
it gets its name from its soft call.
the néné goes about on land much more than other water birds.
there are also good numbers in wild bird collections.
a network is a group of things that are connected together using some form of talking or other communication to stay together.
nets are woven traps usually used to catch fish.
they are usually made out of rope.
a net is a kind of tool.
this language is changing all the time because new words are made and used.
a lot of the words use numbers instead of letters but some were made because of typing errors which are now done on purpose.
some of the numbers and symbols used instead of letters are in the table below.
the first person is the person speaking.
the second person is the person spoken to and the third person is the person spoken about.
every language in the world has nouns, but they are not always used in the same ways.
the history of the word "noun".
the word nature is used for all the things that aren't made by humans.
things that are part of nature are called natural.
many people enjoy looking at natural things or walking in natural places, but people also have to think about how they want to use nature.
these are two of the natural sciences.
in many ways humans and nature can be said to be in conflict.
nature is often seen by humans as natural resources.
people cut down trees to get wood to burn or to build houses, or to make a place to grow food.
when people catch a lot of fish, sometimes they kill all the fish or harm the spawning grounds and there are none left.
people who like to leave nature unharmed and those who feel they need to use more of nature often fight about what they should do.
some people think that humans do not need nature at all, and can replace everything that it does.
a natural resource is a thing people can use which comes from nature: people do not make it themselves.
in every country or place can get all natural resources.
when people do not have some natural resources their quality of life can drop.
for example, when they can not get clean water, people may become ill; if there is not enough wood, all trees will be cut and the forest will disappear (deforestation); if there are not enough fish in a sea, people can die of starvation.
it means things becoming more in order.
this makes it very hard to talk about ideas of time that would apply to negentropy or its effects.
it has a strong form which says that we are needed to do this.
and a weak or obvious form which says if we were not here asking, it wouldn't matter.
cosmology is concerned with this and other issues of where life fits into models of our universe.
it is the north part of the americas.
it is 17 times heavier than earth and is a little bit more heavy than uranus.
soon "neptune" was internationally agreed among many people and was then the official name for the new planet.
its nickname was given when it was first noticed in the months leading up to the "voyager" encounter in 1989: it moved faster than the great dark spot.
to be exact, it looks like that the "liberté" ring might disappear maybe quickly in less than 100 years.
this will happen three different times, also with a fourth in which it will come very close to being at that position.
this will be the last time for about the next 165 years that neptune will be at its point of discovery.
this is explained by the idea of retrogradation.
one might think that the farther a planet is from the sun, the less energy and heat there would be to create and run the very strong winds around.
if a person or a company has "negative net worth," this means that the money they owe to others is more than the money and other things they have or are going to get.
but this is not always exactly what is meant.
it can be used to ask or demand that someone make a decision even if they want to delay.
this is the total area of the city of new york today.
some parts of the city are very separate from the others because of water, such as far rockaway in queens and city island in the bronx.
the city also has a city council that makes some local laws.
most laws in new york city are set by the state government in albany.
the number 1 divides any number to give that same number but it cannot be divided by any other number to give one as the answer.
any number divided by itself always gives 1 as the answer.
the true north strong and free,
we stand on guard for thee.
god keep our land glorious and free!
here are the words in french.
iolani palace was built later on by others of the royal family.
open content is when someone creates something and allows others to copy it or make changes without having to ask for permission.
this means that other people are allowed to copy it and change it if they want.
something that is open content may be free of charge, but it does not have to be.
it is never needed to ask permission to do this, because the people who wrote the text already gave their permission when they clicked the save button.
the rules that say how people can use, change and pass around open content are called a license.
a license explains exactly what you are allowed to do with the content that falls under it.
this is called "share-alike" and means that anything based on work will always be open content.
no language is hard or easy, but people who learn a second language think that their first (native) language is the easiest.
the word oil is used for many different kinds of liquids.
oil usually does not mix with water.
some oils are made from plants and used in foods and for cooking.
people use large oil wells to bring the oil to the top of the ground.
it is used to mean that something is good or correct.
it can often be used instead of the word yes.
some people think that the word comes from the war.
a freezer could be warm if it was turned off or left open.
words that really are opposite to each other, would be words that just cannot be put together.
but this does not mean that philosophy is not about the real world.
sometimes people talk about how they have a "personal philosophy", which means the way a person thinks about the world.
this article is about the ideas that have been thought about by philosophers (people who think and write about ways of thinking) for a long time.
these ideas and questions from philosophy, and many more, have formed a large body of questions and knowledge that are written down in books.
where did the word come from?
philosophy is the study of humans and the world by thinking and asking questions.
it is not part of science, because it is not an observation of things in the real world to find out how they work.
philosophy tries to answer important questions by coming up with answers about real things and asking "why?"
philosophers do not all come up with the same answers to questions.
some people think there are no right answers in philosophy, only better answers and worse answers.
it is easy to argue that philosophy is a good thing, because it helps people to think more clearly.
philosophy helps people to understand the world and the way people act and think.
philosophers believe that asking philosophical questions is useful because it brings wisdom and helps people to learn about the world and each other.
people from some religions do not agree with the beliefs of existentialism.
they try to find answers to those questions.
some thinkers find it very hard to find those words that best describe the ideas they have.
when they find answers to some of these questions philiosophers often have the same problem, that is how to best tell the answers they found to other people.
depending on the meaning of the words they use, the answers change.
most philosophers work by asking questions and looking for good definitions (meanings) of words to help them understand what a question means.
some philosophers say the only thing needed to answer a question is to find out what it means, and that the only thing that makes philosophical questions such as those above difficult is that people do not really know what they mean (for example ludwig wittgenstein).
philosophers will also often use both real and imaginary examples to make a point.
for example, they may write about a real or fictional person in order to show what they think a good person or a bad person is like.
some philosophers look for the simplest way to answer a question and say that is probably the right answer.
physicists are always working to make their models of the world better.
in large groups, such as countries, some people may spend a lot of their time making such agreements.
one of the ways the government leads the group is by making laws and rules which tell everybody what they can and can not do.
the government makes these laws so that society will be safe and well-ordered.
the government can also control people and what happens in a country in other ways besides making laws.
there is usually some disagreement between people within a party, but they work together because they feel that they agree on enough things, and they will have more power if they join together.
they agree to take the same position on many issues, and agree to support the same changes to law and the same leaders.
a person who believes in left-wing political ideas often believes that the money of a country should be given to the poor people in a country, and that the government should be involved more in the economy.
he said that there should be more protection for individual rights against the government.
many groups of people agree on lists of principles.
it can be called an oath, although this word also has a normal meaning of a "solemn promise".
these are things that people feel very strongly about.
whether a word is a profanity will always depend on the way people think.
using such words is thought by some people to be a sin.
since china had cut itself off from the world over the previous few centuries, it had fallen behind other countries in technology, and was helpless to stop this from happening.
a power structure is a system to decide who can decide, and for how long their decision stands, and who can be forced to comply with their decision.
in dictatorship this is done by asking one powerful person to make the decision and then agreeing to force everyone to follow it.
there is only one power network and all others are forced to become part of it, or fight it.
also there are cases of people with hiv who have lived a very long time - with almost no functioning immune system - only their positive attitude seems to make them different from those who die.
an important difference between this view and other medicine is that someone is not just "sick" until they are "well", but will go through periods of time feeling sick, and feeling well, as a part of the rhythms starting to work.
so a child for instance should not just go to bed and stay there for a period of time, but should be able to get up and do things, even if they have to go back to bed quickly afterward to rest some more.
the next largest party is often called the "opposition".
sometimes when there are more than two parties with seats, no one party has over half of the seats.
then two or more parties might join together to form what is called a "coalition".
but there are a few very small countries, such as the island of jersey, where most politicians don't belong to any party and where parties do not matter much.
some other parties exist but are very small and do not hold seats in congress.
in other countries there are larger numbers of parties.
it is named after the philosopher plato.
plato thought it was the job of the philosopher to look for reflections of these perfect things in our universe and to teach others about what they found.
plato and his student aristotle had many ideas which are still the most important in this culture.
it is hard to say if this one was critical.
many famous problems of this kind exist.
a lie cannot also be the truth.
this paradox is not just true in english but in any language powerful enough for a sentence to make a claim about itself.
another example is the statement that there is no cabal.
the potato plant grows well in many different parts of the world.
it is a small plant with large leaves.
the part of the potato that people eat grows under the ground.
the potato is not very good to eat unless it is cooked.
plants are not animals so they do not need to eat other living things to live.
the word "plant" can also mean to put something in the ground.
if plants are grown without sunlight they turn yellow and grow tall.
a prediction is a statement that someone makes about what they think is going to happen.
it is often very helpful to know what is going to happen to help prepare for these future events.
this is helpful because by knowing that it is going to rain, a person can wear the right clothes for it.
it is to do with chance, the study of things that might happen or might not happen.
for example, using probability, you can show that if you throw a coin up in the air and let it land, half of the time it will land with one side facing up, and half the time with the other side facing up.
many coins have a picture of the face of a famous person on one side, and something else on the other side.
often people call the side with the face "heads", and the other side "tails".
every time we roll the die, it will always land on a number between 1 and 6.
body builders will eat foods with a lot of protein as an easy way to keep or gain high levels of muscles that is safer than taking steroids.
protein is also very healthy and keeps you strong and makes your bones last.
in the table the elements are placed in the order of their atomic numbers starting with the lowest number.
period 2 and period 3 both have 8 elements.
it is smaller than a star, and it does not make light.
it is made of rock and ice.
the moon has about five and a half times the mass of pluto.
she was eleven years old at the time.
it is smaller than them and follows a different kind of path around the sun.
many people say the government stops people from having freedom of speech, freedom of religion and other political rights that people in democratic countries have.
the value of pi is around 3.141592654.
this basically means that pi goes on forever, and that it is impossible to get pi exactly.
the formula for finding the area of a circle is pi (radius²).
names of places and people are proper nouns.
a plastic is a material that can change its shape, so many things can be made of plastic.
they are often made from oil that comes out of the ground.
peace is a time without any fights or wars.
one organization that was set up to bring peace among the nations and try to make war a thing of the past was the league of nations after world war i. when it failed to stop world war ii, it was replaced by the united nations which tries to make the world peaceful by standing for collective security between all the members.
this means that if any member is attacked or invaded by another country without attacking that country first, the other members will come to help the country that was attacked first.
this idea was used by the united nations to defend both south korea and kuwait when they were attacked.
not many people live in the north part of the province.
since quebec is a mainly french-speaking province, many people there feel that it is very different from the rest of canada, and they are proud of this difference and want to keep it that way.
others feel that it is important for quebec to stay a part of canada.
reading is a way of getting information from something that is written.
reading and hearing are the two most common ways to get information.
reading can be something that someone does by themself or they can read aloud.
this could be to benefit other listeners.
it could also be to help your own concentration.
"proofreading" is a kind of reading that is done to find mistakes in a piece of writing.
religion is a word for the ideas about the basic structure of the world that people cannot see or know with our other senses, or that scientists cannot study with machines.
when people believe that they have answers to these questions, they often start new religions, or add their new ideas to old religions.
people who teach or write about religion often say that they got their ideas from a supernatural being.
many religions believe that people who live in the right way will go to a pleasant place, or (heaven), after they die, or that people who live in a wrong way will go to a bad place, or (hell).
how long one stays in these places depends on which belief system is asked.
some religions believe in the "resurrection" - that god will bring some, most or all dead people alive again one day; while other religions believe in "reincarnation" - that people will be born again as a new person or as an animal after they die.
this is partly because the questions of religion are so important to people, and because it is difficult to be sure which answers are correct.
many people are unhappy when other people do not agree with their ideas about religion, or when they think that people will cause problems for their religion.
when this happens, people sometimes make wars against people of other religions, or punish people who do not agree with their ideas about religion.
this has happened many times in history, and continues to happen today.
at other times, wars have been begun for more selfish reasons that had really nothing to do with religion, but in order to win more support for these wars, the kings or politicians would try hard to make it seem to be about religion, or would give the people a supposedly 'religious' reason for fighting a war.
the romans are the people of the city of rome in italy.
in ancient times the people of the city of rome created a very large empire called the roman empire.
red is the color that is on the outside edge of the rainbow.
most people who start to eat only raw foods start to feel much better.
they do not get sick as often as people who eat mostly cooked food, and they also live longer.
the first emperor of rome was octavian, from the year 27 b.c.e.
after a while, the emperors grew so weak that the military would just pick one of their generals to be the next emperor.
the romans fought many wars against other countries, and enjoyed watching violent sports.
they enjoyed watching races between chariots pulled by horses, and fights between men using weapons (gladiators).
they enjoyed these shows in the roman colosseum.
some of these things can still be seen today.
there are many kinds of regimes.
after that it became very dangerous and difficult to use these methods.
peaceful regime change is usually by an election - this method is now used by more than half the people on the earth.
such regimes are often called administrations to make it clear they are not dictators, and since the executive branch does not have all the power itself - it may share it with a legislative branch.
the courts are not usually considered part of the regime.
it matters only that they can agree and make everyone in their country do as the agreement says.
when someone wants a regime to change in another country, they usually are not able to do this by any means other than violence or interfering in its election.
the passage where the river flows is called the riverbed and the earth on each side is called a riverbank.
a river begins on high ground or in hills or mountains and flows down from the high ground to the lower ground, because of gravity.
it comes from rain or snow and it can usually be drunk safely, unless it has been polluted.
the water in a sea cannot be drunk safely because it is "salt water".
both people and animals often live near rivers, because they need water to survive.
the beginning of a river is called its "source" or its "headwaters".
young rivers often have lots of small waterfalls.
the middle part of a river.
it might be very deep and run fast.
many cities and towns are built on the banks of mature rivers.
many farms that keep animals such as dairy cows, horses and sheep are found along mature rivers because the animals can drink from the river every day.
the last part of a river.
a river usually ends by flowing into an ocean, a lake or a bigger river.
the place where the river flows out into a bigger body of water is called the "mouth" of the river.
as it flows over the flat land the river becomes wider and slower.
an "old river" often floods across the land after there is lots of rain at the "headwaters".
old rivers are the most useful type of river for growing crops.
the main stream of the river gets broken into many parts that spread out into a triangle shape like the greek letter "delta".
deltas are often places that are not good for towns or farms but are very good for birds and other wildlife.
it can be drunk safely by people unless it is too dirty because of mud or human pollution.
people and animals need fresh water to drink, so they often live by the side of a river.
a reward is getting something good for doing a given task.
it needs someone who has the power to give the good thing.
in trying to catch criminals and other bad people, the government often offers money to people.
this money is given to people who may capture the criminal, or give information that helps the police catch them.
these vehicles have been popular for many years with rural people because they can go off-road, but now they are also popular with people in urban areas because they believe that they look good.
also, there are many fun things you can do with a suv.
one reason is the comfort of their large cabins--they can carry almost as much as a minivan.
another reason is that people think they are safe.
people buy them because they look good, even though a small car might be less expensive and more practical.
in addition, these people think that the suvs are not really as safe as people believe they are.
one problem with suvs is that they roll over more easily than lower vehicles.
the main reason is that the u.s.
they also use tires that are better for off road than for driving on the street.
the meaning of the sapphire is love.
sound is the term to describe what is heard when sound waves pass through a medium to the ear.
a new society may be formed out of only those who still agree, or who just survive the collapse of an old failed one.
the words that are not on the list are called "unfamiliar".
the result is a reading age.
someone of this age should be able to read the text.
scientists try to explain why things act the way they do, and are the way they are.
they compete to provide better explanations.
spain is a country in the southwest of europe.
the people of spain are called "spaniards".
the religion of most of the people in spain is roman catholic.
each part has its own government.
people have lived in spain for a long time.
there have been people living there since the stone age.
the christian kingdoms that were still in the north of spain fought to take the rest spain again from the muslims.
in the year 1492, they took the last part of spain that still belonged to the moors, granada.
it is very important to know that the king ruled as much as the queen.
spain sent many soldiers and businessmen to north and south america, and they took over very large parts of those two continents.
this empire did not make spain a rich country, for most of the money had to be spent in wars.
many of these wars were fought against other european countries who were trying to take over parts of the americas.
some jewish religious buildings were also turned into churches.
however it was not a single countries but many independent countries with a single king.
there was not much peace in spain during the first part of the 20th century.
some spaniards tried to set up a government chosen by the people (a democracy), and they made the king of spain leave the country.
but the king did not rule as a dictator; instead, he chose to set up a democracy.
it is the eighth economy of the world and is an important part of the european union.
in la meseta it can be very hot in the summer and cold or very cold in the winter.
spain also has many mountain ranges.
since spain is in the south of europe, it is very sunny.
it is very important because ships can sail up the river and through the great lakes right into the middle of north america.
it is the third largest river in canada.
there is a big river called the guadalquivir river which goes through seville.
a very old story says that the city was started by the famous hero of greece, named hercules.
the romans when they came to spain gave it the latin name of hispalis.
seville is also the name of a place in the state of ohio.
the name comes from the italian "salare" meaning to make something salty.
many salamis are named after the city or region where they come from.
it often has spices in it and is covered in a casing.
many countries and regions have special kinds of sausage.
wanting to have rules of grammar that do not change and the same vocabulary used by everyone for better communication is another reason that is often given for defining one group's language as correct.
these rules are usually called laws.
laws help to make sure people have rights and that their rights are taken care of.
it often replaces money which people would use to buy the same help.
people who have no money and cannot get help from society may have to agree to do things they do not want to do, or force others to do things they do not want to.
those who are seen as trying to get a free ride will get much less help.
they are very hard to detect, unlike people who cheat or commit fraud.
when there are too many of these kinds of people, especially when they are politicians, people begin to mistrust their government.
the more money a person or a society has, the easier it is to do things and the better off people are.
the less money, the more difficult things become and the worse people feel.
it is used very often in building trades to mean the place where a building will go up.
a gravesite is a place where a person will be buried after they die.
it is used as a possible way of explaining how some things work; it is very hard for scientists to prove everything, or answer every question that they can imagine by using just one theory on its own.
both mathematics are just as good to explain what we can see.
opponents argue that we can't ever know if a theory is true as a whole if we only take the bits that work.
when a person had new or unusual ideas, and wanted to talk to a crowd about them, sometimes he or she would stand on an empty soapbox so that everyone could see and hear the talk well.
the word supernatural is used for things that some people believe are real, but that are not part of nature.
in many religions, a spirit is considered to be the part of a being that is not the body.
other words with the same meanings are soul and ghost.
death is when the spirit separates from the body.
some people think that without their bodies, spirits can still exist on the earth and in places like heaven or hell.
some believe that spirits can talk with people, or change things in the world.
this phrase is often used when the words and sentences of a law could mean more than one thing, but a judge must decide what meaning is correct.
a seed is the part of a plant that the plant makes that can grow into a new plant, by planting near another plant.
there are many different kinds of seeds.
some plants make a lot of seeds, some make only a few.
because most kinds of seeds carry the food that helps the new plant begin to grow, many kinds of seeds are good food for animals and people.
the seed also has a seed coat.
a sail is a large piece of cloth on the top of some boats.
the wind goes around the sail and makes the boat move through the water.
the piece that the sail is attached to is called a mast.
there are many different names for different kinds of sailing boats with different kinds of sails.
now they are not so important for transport, but they are still used for recreation and competition.
many kinds of animals have hair or fur on their skin.
the skin of human beings (people) usually has very small hairs on it that are hard to see.
people have hair that is longer and easier to see on some parts of their bodies, such as the tops of their heads and men's beards.
other things can be said to have "skins".
some examples of business search engines are
according to kabbalah, the shabbat day is meant to be like a perfect world in which everyone knows about god and loves him, a kind of world that has not been since the garden of eden, and will not be again until the messiah comes.
the exact way depends on denomination.
these problems can be hard to fix.
finding the middle of the data.
name | a b c d e f g h i j
the formula for the mean is
the problem with the mean is that it does no longer tell about how the values are distributed.
to find the median we sort the data from the smallest number to the largest number and then choose the number in the middle.
if there are an even number of data we choose the two middle ones and calculate their mean.
for example the most common letter in english is the letter "e".
we use it to find out that some percent, percentile, number, or fraction of people or things in a group do something or fit in a certain category.
speed is the distance that an object moves in a certain amount of time.
a group of farms working together or a group of factories working together could be 'states' since people can control them and protect them.
they formed proper boundaries for their lands and worked with power within the state itself more, such as the church or the nobility.
each of them sees itself as a democracy.
each of them however has a different idea what "democracy" really means.
pluralism tells us that all people are not equal, but still allows each group of people to tell the state what to do.
this means that all power in the state is 'diffused' across the people who live there.
this means that the working class (the people who work in factories etc) have hardly any power but the people who own the factories have a lot of power.
an institutionalist state can be made up of both marxist and pluralist people, both which have the power to control themselves and not influence the other parties of the state.
anarchism is when a group of people have complete freedom and don't believe in having a state at all.
law and order are not necessary.
a stream is a natural flow of water moving across country between banks.
it is smaller than a river.
it took people many years of looking carefully through telescopes to find them.
no new big ones have been found for a long time, but more small objects are found every year.
they are all bigger than earth and are mostly made up of gas.
the power of the lightning was measured to be 1000 times more powerful than lightning from the earth.
slaves do not have rights and have no choice but to work.
they are bought and sold in the same way.
people are still being made slaves in some parts of the world.
the ways in which it is done have changed.
another form of slavery still happening today is forced child labor.
a young woman or a girl who does not have hiv may sell for as much as us$1,000 in thailand.
slavery was a very normal thing more than 150 years ago, but now most people know it is wrong, and most countries do not allow it.
they made it a crime to own slaves.
many philosophies and religions say that a soul is the part of a living human being which is supernatural and lives after death.
many different opinions exist as to what happens to personal experience after death.
most atheists say that there is no such thing as a soul, and that the body is the only part of a person.
it is in this sense that the word appears in the term soul music.
however that music was also influenced by gospel music which was religious.
it can be broken down by bacteria.
it does not work well in hard water.
1.george can easily deceive his friend
a service is a job or work done for someone else.
often, the person who gives the service will get something in return for the service.
the person who gives the service can get money in return.
the person who gives the service can get another service in return.
the service economy can be in a region like a country or in a town or city.
when someone does not like the ideology or logic used in an argument, they often say it makes no sense or is nonsense.
it has a long history of being used in politics, to mean almost anything.
a synagogue is a place where jews meet to worship and pray to god.
a synagogue will always have a big room for prayers.
there might be some smaller rooms for studying.
there will also usually be a big room for special events.
the person who reads the torah scroll stands there when he reads.
in some synagogues men and women sit in different places.
some synagogues even have a short wall so that they can not see each other.
this is so that the people will think about the prayers better.
jews may call synagogues by different names.
some jews call the synagogue a temple.
readability tests can not tell them how easily a reader can understand the information in the text.
in the middle ages, the christian church began to use theatre as a way of telling the stories from the bible to people who did not know how to read.
they wrote mystery plays, where each part of the bible story would be a play put on by a different group of people.
the plays written in this style make people think about questions like "what is it like to be a person in the world?"
a very easy way to tell if someone is using this the right way is if the object that they are talking about can be pointed to.
a test is a way of checking something to see if it is true or if it works.
people are tested to see what they have learned.
people and animals can also be tested for illnesses.
they 'sit' in the car seat to see if a human in the crash would have been injured or killed.
crash tests cost a lot of money.
so, there is now a situation where both sides are not making any big changes.
it can only be used for the thing made by that business.
other businesses can make a drink that is similar, but they have to use a different name for their drink.
the business tells the government of its country that it wants to use a certain trademark for the thing it makes, and then the government says that no one else can use that trademark.
when people write a word that is a trademark or show a picture or symbol that is a trademark, they should say that it is a trademark.
businesses that do things for people instead of making things are service providers.
they can get a service mark instead of a trademark for the things they do.
the plants could be huge trees or ferns.
according to the old testament, the ten commandments were rules for life given by god to the jews at mt.
the jews received the commandments after they had left egypt during the reign of pharaoh ramses.
since there have been many translations, there may be variations in the way the commandments are written.
catholics and lutherans end the first commandment at "i will have mercy through a thousand generations on those who have love for me and keep my laws."
and separate in their last two commandments the desire for a man's wife from the desire for other things he owns.
to "be false to the married relation", called adultery, is when a married person has sex with a person other than his or her spouse.
the bible does not say this includes unmarried people having sex with each other, although some people think this.
some people say that this means trying to get what the person wants, while others say it means even wanting it.
in the new testament, jesus talked about who was guilty of breaking these commandments.
he said that even if someone was just angry and rude to another person, they might be judged for murder, and if they just looked with desire or lust at a woman, they had committed adultery in their heart.
the table below shows those differences.
most christians believe that sunday is a special day of worship and rest.
it is there to remember the resurrection of jesus on the first day of the week on the jewish calendar.
they say that this ordinance is no longer valid, because god has replaced his old creation by a new one ().
they say there are examples in the new testament, and in other writings surviving from the first few centuries.
still others believe that the sabbath remains as a day of rest on the saturday, reserving sunday as a day of worship.
this would seem to indicate that while the sabbath was still of importance to the jews, sunday was a separate day for worship and teaching from scriptures.
another understanding on this comes from roman catholicism: they hold that one may build and use "likenesses", as long as the object is not worshipped.
some protestants will picture jesus in his human form, while refusing to make any image of god or jesus in heaven.
jehovah's witnesses criticize the use of all of the above, as well as the use of the cross.
this story lists a very different set of commandments.
a table is a piece of furniture with a flat top supported by one or more legs.
often we put a cloth on the table, flat on the top.
this is a rotating piece of wood in the center of the table.
a tree is a tall plant with a trunk and branches made of wood.
it can live for many years.
the roots of a tree are under the ground.
a single tree has many roots.
the roots carry food and water from the ground through the trunk and branches to the leaves of the tree.
they spread out so that the leaves can receive sunlight.
the leaves take in sunlight and use water and food from the roots to make the tree grow, and to reproduce.
often in a tragedy, there is one thing that the hero does not want to happen and tries to prevent, but no matter what he does, it makes this thing more and more sure to happen.
the name is the same all over the world, so that when scientists from different places talk or write about the living thing, they can understand each other.
a temple is a building where people go to practice their religion.
in a temple people perform religious activities like prayers and worship of god.
he became king of england as well as king of scotland, but the two countries stayed separate.
the weather of the united kingdom is warm summers, cool winters and lots of rain throughout the year.
the people of the united kingdom vote for a member of parliament to speak for them and to help make laws for them.
even though she is the head of state, she does not choose what the united kingdom should do about things like education, healthcare or other choices.
the person who chooses for the people in the united kingdom is the prime minister, who is in charge of the government.
the peers sitting in the house of lords are not chosen by all of the people of the united kingdom.
there are two other hereditary peers in the house of lords because they also have jobs to do on state occasions
they have in common that education is required from ages five to sixteen.
it is so huge that scientists measure its size in billions of light years - the distance light travels in a whole year.
when something is unprofitable, it means that there is no profit being made.
a product can also be unprofitable if many people want to buy it, but only at a lower price than it can be made for.
unit of measurement
this is done to be able to compare or order two or more such observations.
saying something has a length of 2 metres therefore means that its exactly twice as long as that rod used to define the metre, or that light takes twice the time defined for a metre to travel that distance.
this also makes it easy to say that something that is 3 metres long is longer than something else, that is only 2 metres long.
most of the time 12 or 16 of the smaller unit make the bigger unit.
this is difficult to rememver, so there is another system that uses 10 of the smaller unit to make the bigger one.
the property of the thing being measured is given as a number of units of measure.
the number only has sense when the unit of measurement is also given.
this number does not make sense without the unit of measure.
the unit of measure is the meter.
that is, the unit of measurement used to measure a property is the same everywhere and does not change.
it is easier to measure large things using larger units of measurement.
the metric system is a system of measurement used in most of the world.
the unit of time is the second.
a day is usually said to be 24 hours, but is actually a small bit longer.
this difference is corrected at the end of every year.
a unit of measurement that applies to money is called a unit of account.
when this is gone it will be easier to get rid of these units.
it completes its turn around itself in 17 hours and 14 minutes.
this planet can be seen with the naked eye under the perfect conditions.
each school offers many courses that students take to earn a degree.
the value of something is how much it is worth.
often the best way to find the value of something is use the price that it can be sold for.
he felt that god had told him in a dream to make an international language.
new words are invented or words change their meaning.
it is difficult to be exact.
some words may be understood but not known well enough to be used.
words that are only understood and not used are called “passive vocabulary”.
sometimes it may not be easy to decide if a word is understood.
it may depend on the context.
knowing the “context” the word is being used in may make it possible to guess what it means.
someone who knows many words is said to have a "wide vocabulary".
knowing lots of words will help with reading and listening to people.
it will also help with writing and talking.
many of these new words were used as well as the old ones but they may have a different meaning.
this could be because they were taken from latin or greek.
using big words does not always make the meaning clear.
there is a lot that can be said in very simple ways.
this allows them to travel out of town or do other things they wouldn't otherwise have time for.
they are used in food and for cooking.
a verb is a kind of word (see part of speech) that usually tells about an action or a state and is the main part of a sentence.
in english, verbs are the only kind of word that changes to show past or present tense.
every language in the world has verbs, but they are not always used in the same ways.
you can say they have the same shape.
the same is true for the past and the past participle.
when you look for a verb in the dictionary, it is usually the plain form that you look for.
the difference between them is mainly in where they can go in a sentence.
usually this is done by adding "n't".
many people think that all different ways of using verbs are all different tenses.
after if, wish and would rather, the past perfect can be used to talk about past events that never happened.
there is also a form of "be" that is used in conditionals to show that something is not true (e.g., if i were a bird, i would fly to california.)
in these cases you can usually see the difference by looking at various properties of the words.
it is the brightest object in the night sky except for the moon.
this is hot enough to melt lead.
the vatican city is the smallest country in the world (0.44 km²) and it is an enclave of italy because it is surrounded by the city of rome.
popes had always tried to stop italy becoming one country because they might lose their control of the papal states.
the pope said he was a prisoner of the italian state and excommunicated all the people who helped the people who invaded his state.
the people in it may come from many different places.
the most common is the internet.
world war i
world war i was a war fought by a lot of countries, which is why it is called a "world" war.
other names it has been called are the great war and the war to end all wars.
world war i was fought through most of the continent of europe.
there was also a no man's land that broke into this area.
most of the fighting that happened in this area was trench warfare.
the other fronts that had a lot of fighting includes the middle eastern front and the italian front.
because of riots in the city, the archduke's procession decided to leave the city quietly through back roads after making their public appearance.
all five of the men failed to kill the archduke while he passed through the large crowd.
the archduke and his wife were leaving the city when the driver of their car took a wrong turn onto a large street with many people.
the reason germany told france and russia that they were at war so quickly, was because they thought they could win the war if they attacked first and quickly.
they had a list of all the men who had to join the army, and where those men had to go, and the times of every train that would carry those men to where they would have to fight.
the germans were quickly building ships and putting men in its army and germany was almost going to become as powerful as britain.
turkey went into the war because it had lost much of its empire before the war and wanted to get it back.
greece went into the war because it was an ally to serbia.
greece and serbia became free again but a lot of greek people still lived in turkish lands which used to belong to greece.
but when the bulgarians did a short time before the war, the serbians and greeks felt cheated because the bulgarians got a lot of land which they felt was greek or serbian.
but as it received nothing they were interested in another war.
most people thought it would be a short war.
they thought the armies would move around quickly to attack each other, and one would defeat the other without too many people getting killed.
they thought the war would be about brave soldiers - they did not know what the war would really be like.
only a few people like lord kitchener said that the war would take a long time.
they could do this because the belgians had fought so long at liège.
often many men died fighting over very small pieces of land.
they began to hate their new government because it wouldn't stop the war.
the new government asked for peace from the germans.
part of the treaty said the countries of the world should come together to make an international organization to stop wars from happening.
they are all written in html.
if one person writes something wrong, then the next person can correct it.
the next person can also add something new to the page.
people can discuss there as well.
they can also be used to talk to other people.
a word is something spoken by the mouth, that can be pronounced.
it is also a collection of letters used together to try to communicate a meaning, and these can also usually be pronounced.
these countries made an agreement called the berlin-rome-tokyo axis in the year of 1937, in which they agreed to help each other in military conflicts.
germany was not allowed to have an air force or big ships in its navy.
he wanted to take land from other countries, as well as hated many groups of people including russians, jews, and people with dark skin.
it was the last time in the war that the germans were able to send a major attack against the allies.
many battles were fought in the pacific.
the war also made weapons with far more killing power.
bill gates helped with making windows.
it is usually filled with a sheet of glass.
people have been making wine for about 5000 years.
in mathematics, we call the distance between the end of an object farthest to the left and the end of an object farthest to the right its width.
for example, if we measure the distance between the left side and right side of your chair, we measure its width.
rain is water that falls from clouds in the sky.
water helps blood carry nutrients from the stomach to all parts of the body to keep the body alive.
water can also be called aqua
a want is a wish or a desire for something.
if a person would like to have something, but can choose not to have it, that thing is wanted or can be called a want.
wants can be for the same things as needs.
if there is no cake then he or she may have to eat something else, perhaps bread.
the need is no longer so important (the person is no longer hungry) although the want may still be there.
want can also be the idea of what it means to be poor, hungry or with no money.
if one site runs more than one server they must use different
mapped to the same computer in which case they are known as
there are many others including some for practically every
to work with the server, they must be a web-based language instead of being a language which is used to make normal computer programs.
the reasons of any war are very complex; while a war can start for just about any reason, there is usually more than one issue involved.
sometimes people see a difference between fighting between countries or people and the formal declaration of a state of war.
usually it is when a country is brought into another one or when an outside force is trying to destroy the current government.
it is the time it takes the earth to go completely around (orbit) the sun once.
there are several ways used to measure the length of a year.
it is what a person says when he or she is addressing another person in second person.
chinese is special because although there are many spoken languages, they use only one way of writing the language.
many people in china think that although these different languages sound different, they are still one language.
they call these different languages "dialects" to tell them apart from one another.
chinese are used by the han people in china and other races who have come to recognize themselves as chinese.
john does not have a hat.
some places and countries did not know about a zero, which may have made it harder for those people to do mathematics.
for example, a person is counting down the time to the start of something, such as a foot race or when a rocket takes off.
zero is the exact time of the start of the race or when the rocket takes off into the sky.
if the difference between the number of pieces in two piles is zero, it means the two piles have an equal number of pieces.
they usually work on animals in the wild.
we need a little bit of zinc to help our body run well.
some people even say that when we get colds, we should take more zinc.
their fur has black and white stripes.
they also have a dark line down their back.
they can have babies (foals) when they are about five years old and can have one foal every year.
this is done for the animals, but also that people can see the animals as if they were in nature, and not in a zoo.
there the animals are held in very bad conditions.
people who copy a work that is protected under copyright without permission can be punished by the law, usually with a fine.
in other, more serious cases, a person who copies a work that is protected under copyright could be arrested or go to prison.
so it is often a good idea to register anyway, especially for works that are sold for money.
this period has now been extended to 70 years in most cases.
this means that no one owns the copyright to them, and everyone is free to copy, use and change them without having to ask for permission or pay the owner.
this means that people can copy a very small amount of a work to use in reviews or in research reports.
some people argue that copyright laws make it easier for people to make new works and think of new ideas.
but others believe that copyright laws make it harder to be creative.
but the publisher has many different things to sell, and they may not want to sell the work the author made.
but without a publisher, it can be even harder for an author to sell his or her work.
in the past, students were prohibited from speaking their mother tongue in school and were expected to speak only mandarin.
a prison is an building where people who have been guilty and convicted of crimes are held.
people are part of the criminal justice system of a country.
a person who has been charged with a crime may be sent to prison if the court thinks that the person may not come to their trial, or if the court thinks that the person may be a risk to the community.
in times of war, prisoners of war may also be held in prisons.
there are usually many locked gates inside the prison to control the inmates.
the manager of a prison is called the warden.
there are special prisons for people under the age of 18 who commit crimes.
people living in mexico or who are from there are called mexicans.
another powerful culture was the one of teotihuacan.
the aztecs thought he was the returned quetzalcoatl, so they did not want to fight against him.
the next 10 years the country was in chaos.
there were many presidents who ruled for a short time and all kinds of people fought against each other.
the party would rule for a very long time.
after several decades more and more people became unhappy with the pri.
he has spoken against american plans to build a wall between the two countries to slow illegal immigration.
the crack would have filled with water from rivers, and eventually the sea might have broken through from the north and the south.
even to this day, the east coast of the americas is shaped somewhat like west coast of africa, but the difference is actually much greater than it might appear, so it is not really an exact fit or even a close one.
water gets heated by the sun in the caribbean sea and then moves northwest toward the north pole.
it is also known as quicksilver
it is surrounded by large areas of water.
it is thought to be the continent where the first humans came from.
the reason it is so warm and dry is because the continent is very wide - this means it is far away from the ocean, which brings rain and wind.
the cold war was not like any other war, because the two main enemies' armies never actually fought against each other.
even though they were allies, they still did not like each other.
one part was for the united kingdom, one part was for france, one part was for the ussr, and one part was for the united states.
these mountains are known as fold mountains.
in antarctica, it is always dark during the winter, but in the summer the sun shines 24 hours a day.
it is also known as antarctica
these poles move from year to year.
people can tell they are near these poles by looking at a compass.
these poles stay in the same place, and are usually the ones we mean if we just say north or south pole.
people can tell that they are at these poles by looking at the stars (at the poles, a star just circles around at the same height, never dipping to the horizon).
for many weeks in the middle of winter, the sun never rises.
once the sun does come up, it is the beginning of a six month summer where a person can stand there at any hour on the clock and observe the sun above the horizon appearing to slowly travel counter-clockwise around him.
it is far from places where people live, and ships going there often have to find their way through thick sea ice.
a letter left for scott showed that amundsen and his men had beaten them by a month, by using dogs to pull their sledges.
he committed suicide by walking out of their tent into the cold.
next spring, the three bodies in the tent were found by a team from the main part of the expedition - who had spent the winter in the expeditions's hut by the sea.
they also traded fur with the europeans.
they once lived in houses made of snow called igloos.
people put things in a container.
a bed is a piece of furniture.
it is used for sleeping on.
it is usually made of stone or brick.
it offers one time for all the internet (the same time can be used by people all over the world).
these are like heavy glass jars with one side facing out to form the screen.
they study the family and examine problems such as crime and drug abuse.
european cities were changing as many people moved into cities and began working in factories.
the war became slow in the west and was fought in "trenches", holes soldiers dug in the ground to protect themselves.
many men were killed on both sides.
in the east the soldiers fought normal battles and the germans won in the east.
this person has no real powers but can order elections for the bundestag.
it can stop all acts by the law-makers or other leaders if they feel they go against germany's constitution.
there are at least seven million people from other countries living in germany.
the number of young people who start going to universities is now more than three times as big as it was after the end of world war ii, and the trade and technical schools of germany are some of the best in the world.
a large social welfare system gives people money when they are ill or cannot find a job, and other things the people need.
many important people in history are thought of as "german", because they are at the heart of german culture, although they did not always live in germany.
many of them are in berlin.
about half of them are protestants and about half are roman catholics.
on a clear day it appears blue.
since all colors of the rainbow create a white light we should see a white sky, but blue light scatters much more than red.
some tones may sound alike to people who do not speak a tone language and are easy to forget.
the thaler was large silver coin first made in the year 1518.
beer is made by adding warm water to malted barley and other grains.
the water is now called wort.
it is not known exactly how this happened, but it could be that a piece of bread or grain became wet, and a short time later, it began to ferment and made a pulp that causes drunkenness.
it could even be possible that bread was first baked to be a way to make beer that is easy to carry around.
different countries have different ways to make beer.
this is because of the reinheitsgebot.
the word american is usually used to mean a person or a thing from the united states of america.
this means that the ocean around the pole is always very cold and it is covered by a thick sheet of ice.
it is near the above north pole.
for hundreds of years sailors were able to tell how far north they were by seeing how high the north star appeared in the sky.
it is made in many forms.
there are also many more people working on pop music who are not seen on the stage or in the video.
thousands of new pop bands are formed each year around the world.
how people understand reality is not the same as what reality is because people do not know everything about reality.
in each team there are 11 players.
10 of them play on the field and one is the goalkeeper.
it is played in more countries than any other game.
you may be looking for the food."
spam emails are usually sent to try to get the person to buy something or do something else that will cause gain for the sender.
spam emails are often sent to many people at once trying to get them to buy a product or sign up for a service.
the people who receive the email did not ask to receive the email, and do not want to receive it.
another trick that spammers use is to put a picture — even one that cannot be seen — into a spam message.
the picture will have a name that goes with just that one email.
if they get this request, then they know that you read their email, which could cause a person to receive even more spam email.
in an earthquake the ground moves.
there are big earthquakes and small earthquakes.
big earthquakes can damage buildings and hurt people.
when the earth moves in an earthquake, it can cause waves in the ocean.
a big wave in the ocean caused by an earthquake is called a "tsunami".
a number is given to an earthquake that shows the size of the earthquake.
some parts of the world get more earthquakes than other parts.
the parts of the earth that get most earthquakes are near the edges of these plates.
earthquakes send sound waves through the earth.
in these places it is a good practice to build houses and other buildings so they will not collapse when there is an earthquake.
for many years earthquakes have occurred.
that is why there are earthquake proof buildings.
they will not be able to move easily, because their joints hurt.
when a person gets help for scurvy, they usually get better very quickly.
babies start eating again after one or two days of help.
it is called this because it has a different amount of electrons than it usually has.
these are ones in alpha radiation.
anthropologists do research in many places and study how people live now and how they may have lived in the past (using the study of archaeology).
a country can also use the military to kill or arrest people, or members of groups, from other countries who have hurt or killed their own citizens.
these trained people are called soldiers.
this lets the country to use their military for other jobs.
usually, these people hired by a country this way used to be members of the military before leaving and working for other people, companies and countries.
the arguments and evidence that they provide to prove they did not commit the crime is also called their defense.
education also means helping people to learn how to do things and encouraging them to think about what they learn.
it is also important for educators to teach ways to find and use information.
there are many different kinds of education.
for example, a parent teaches a child how to prepare a meal.
someone can also get an informal education by reading many books from a library.
parents are free to let their children receive a private education, but they must pay for it.
the army is the part of a country's military that fights on the ground.
people in the army are called soldiers.
that is up to their commander.
they must keep good care of the items.
the person is put through tests, so that the army will know if the recruit can do it or not.
it depends on where he is testing that will tell him how hard it will be.
he will also take tests to determine what job he will do in the military.
to teach is to help students to learn new knowledge or skills.
to teach someone is to help him or her learn from explanations or experiments.
parents also teach their children, but parents also do many other things with their children.
some people want to teach so the learner can learn things that make them happy, for example to learn how to do a job they like.
some people think teachers should teach people how to obey god.
there are many different places where teaching happens.
the word ‘theology’ was first used to describe the study of the christian god, but some now use it to describe the study of religion generally, but not everyone agrees that it is right to do so.
this is the last known mention.
the oldest human remains to have been found in europe were found in romania.
being that they are europe's oldest human remains, this may have been when the first people came to europe.
the first written proof of people living in what is now romania comes from herodotus in the fourth book of his histories (herodotus).
there was a lot of gold and silver found in roman dacia, and a large portion of gold and silver were found in the western carpathians.
the romans had a lot of people living in the colony of roman dacia, and brought with them vulgar latin, which they started to put a lot of effort into romanization.
it is thought that the romanians were formed from big ethnic groups that came from both the south and north of the danube.
many people in romania during this time thought of him as a ruler with a great sense of justice and defense for his country.
they stayed this way even when they made up most of the people in those areas.
this made romania into a personal union, which happens when the same person rules two different areas.
the personal union did not include transylvania, because most of the people that were living there in the upper class were still hungarian.
much of the romanian army were either captured or killed over four months.
this was the most land that romania was ever in control of.
this gave them control of the country.
by being friends with the arab countries, romania was allowed take part in peace talks between israel and egypt and between israel and the plo.
this fought with nicolae ceauşescu's autarchic ways and caused him to want to give back all the money that they got from the companies.
when they came into power, several other parties from before the war were born again.
the people who protested did not recognize the results of the election.
this was because they thought that members of the national salvation front were communists.
after the year 1996, several other parties came into power and lost it.
the danube then flows into the area of the black sea inside of romania.
the siret river runs from the north to the south of moldavia.
the carpathian mountains make up a big part of the center of romania.
most of this falls as snow.
in the south-centern parts of the country, the amount of rain and snow that falls is around.
these cannot be included in any of those areas.
most of the influences that came to romania during the old times until the middle ages were from slavic people.
each of the communes has its own council that is led by a mayor.
for example, a person giving a thing must find another person who wants to get that thing.
the things that are given from one person to the other are called goods.
one person can do a job or work for another, and get something in return in a trade.
money can be given in return for a service or for a thing.
if money is part of the trade, then the person who gives the money is buying, and the person who gets the money is selling.
a place where trading takes place is called a market.
it has created a common economic area with europe-wide laws allowing people to move and trade in other eu countries almost like it was their own.
now already 15 member countries have replaced their national currencies with the euro.10 new countries became members of the eu in 2004 and 2 more became members of the eu in 2007.
today there are 27 member countries altogether.
for example, a british person can move to greece to work there, or just to live there, and he or she does not need a permission from an authority in greece.
in the same way, products made in one member country can be sold in any other member country without any special permissions or extra taxes.
for this reason, the members agree rules on product safety - they want to know that a product made in another country will be as safe as it would be if it had been made in their own country.
each member state takes a turn at being president of the council for six months.
but a decision cannot be made if there the vote against is big enough.
today there are 27 members but the idea that more should join is not seen as a good one by everyone.
there are many discussions in the eu about how it should develop and change in the future.
greece fought in both world war i and world war ii.
his family was jewish but was not very religious.
he was very interested in trying to understand how an invisible force could make the needle move and became interested in studying science and mathematics.
he was not a good student, and many people thought him to be not very smart.
she has been never heard of again.
the nazis hated people who were jewish or who came from jewish families.
the reason for this is time dilation, which can be understood better by the twin paradox.
it is a number given to all physical objects to describe how much potential the object has in order to change.
an object always has the same amount of mass, even if you were to go to the moon, while the weight of an object changes if you go to the moon.
an example of this is a photon.
a black hole is an object in the universe that has such a strong pull of gravity, that not even light can escape it.
this was proven during a solar eclipse, when the sun moved behind the moon, and made light
all of the matter that we know today came out of this point 15 billion years ago.
he liked the ideas of socialism and of having only one government for the whole world.
one of his inspiring sayings is "there are two ways to live your life, one is as though nothing is a miracle, the other is as though everything is a miracle."
one side of each coin is the same in all euro countries.
today there are 12 different sets of coins.
some people see it as the latin capital letter c with an equal sign (=).
when they do this, as the value of gold increases, so does the value of their money.
stars shine and the light can be seen with a telescope, but they also give off radio waves.
this gives similar results to having a single dish as big as the distance between the telescopes, so even very faint signals can be received.
because light that leaves a star 100 light years away will take 100 years to get to us, this means that when we see the star's light, we are actually seeing that star as it was 100 years ago.
the best silk used to come from korea.
the nation of korea was made into two countries after world war ii.
only a few people eat dog meat these days.
farmers are not rich and struggle against food from other countries.
the people of goguryeo ran away and made a new kingdom with the name "barhae".
the kingdom made a big government.
the name of the kingdom was "joseon".
a man from the military made very strong ships.
the people of joseon were always friends with the people of china.
the name of the queen was "min".
they also stopped the people of korea from speaking the language of korea.
the people marched in the streets.
the people made a big demonstration.
in 1948 the people in the south made a country called south korea.
the line between north and south was the same in the end as it was before the war.
no land was lost or gained.
many people study english in a country where the people speak english.
it is also very popular in countries which are friends with the us.
a multiple-choice question is a question where you choose which answer (e.g.
this number is between 10 and 990.
many jobs need a number bigger than 600.
it also tests more difficult business english.
it is more difficult than the pbe.
it also tests difficult business listening.
it also tests speaking in other parts of tourism.
a learner can have a high mark on the speaking certificate but a low one in writing, for example.
a country is neutral when it does not take sides among the countries who are at war.
the land is divided into 26 areas called "cantons".
the mountains are very tall in switzerland.
there are no mountains in the north of switzerland resulting in many cities and towns built in the north.
they come to work in switzerland.
together the people could be free from the people of habsburg, who were very strong.
more and more people worked together to be free.
more areas came to be part of switzerland.
switzerland did not fight in world war i or world war ii.
it did not join the united nations for 57 years because of its neutrality.
every year one of these people is made president.
there are 46 people in the council of states.
there are many places for tourists.
these towns are important for skiing.
it does not mean anything in any other language.
it is found on the north side of lake ontario.
people have come from around the world to live in toronto.
in fact, more than half the people who live in the city were not born in canada.
here are some words for small numbers.
some of them are silver and some of them are gold-colored.
but most of the time people use paper dollars.
the cent or "penny" is the smallest or least worth coin used in the u.s.
this number is set by the federal reserve board and is changed however money is in the country.
proper feeding will make a cat live much longer compared to hunting or being fed table scraps.
a hairball is a small amount of fur that is vomited up by animals when it becomes too big.
they also sleep a lot, sometimes up to 18 hours a day.
this makes them easy to care for.
these are not part of the message itself, but rather of its context
the word "hedge" can mean completely different things based on the context.
in linguistics a hedge is a word or set of words that make other words less important.
a miracle under the second definition would be like a person being able to leap a tall building in a single bound.
an example from the bible would be a man crippled since birth getting up and walking after jesus told him to do so.
it is usually said that there are.
about 220 million more people speak it as a second language and there are as many as a billion people who are learning.
many people consider him to be the greatest english writer of all time and one of the greatest in the world.
they had various reasons for saying this.
turkey is one of the countries in the world that can make enough food to feed itself.
there are also a few christian and jewish people living in turkey.
everyone has the right to practice their religion freely in the country, however there are some restrictions.
this tells the story of the israelites and how god chose them to be called "his people".
this part of the bible is considered to be holy by jews as well as christians.
these parts are called deuterocanonical by those churches that accept them as part of the bible, and apocrypha by those that do not.
the second part is called the new testament, most of which was written first in greek.
the main part of this book is the story of jesus christ's life.
some are songs of praise to god.
the territory of this state is the largest of the 16 states.
the highest point is the zugspitze, which is also the highest mountain in germany.
he killed his twin brother named remus, with whom he had been raised by a wolf, and became the first king of rome.
rome was the center of the roman kingdom, later of the roman republic, then of the roman empire.
the children in rome have to start school at the age of six and 14.
"scavengers" are carnivores that eat other animals which they did not kill themselves and which have been dead for a time.
they are kept in a very beautiful
three golden crowns in the coat of arms of the city symbolize them.
that changed only recently after the second world war,
to the north of the river is mauritania.
the earth has only one moon.
the latin word for the moon is "luna", which is why the word used to talk about the moon is "lunar".
the same half of the moon faces toward earth at all times, no matter where it moves.
but different parts of the moon are lit up by the sun, so it looks different at different times of the month.
it does this about 13 times in one year.
this is also the way the earth is attracted to the sun, and stays in its orbit.
it is normal for moons to be named after people from mythology.
it makes things move toward each other.
on the earth, we see that it makes things fall toward the ground.
the farther apart the things are, the smaller the pull of gravity.
things that are falling still have mass, but we cannot measure their weight, so we say that they are "weightless".
they look like they are floating.
they still have mass, so we still have to push them or pull them to make them go or stop.
he wondered what made this happen.
this is the force that acts on the body in a direction away from the centre, which contributes to making the body try to fly away.
it is in the east of the country on the river danube.
it is the largest city of austria.
a homonym is a word that sounds the same but has more than one meaning and is spelt differently.
but after the leader of the group was captured in 1992, shining path was not a threat anymore.
tourists from other countries like to come to peru because of the history and also to enjoy nature.
most of them were created after the second world war, although their historical roots can be traced back to the early middle ages in some cases.
there might be built a transrapid from the city center to the airport.
it is about west of poland.
the wall divided the city until 1989 when the east german government decided to allow anyone to cross, and people decided to destroy the wall.
people with emphysema may find it hard to breathe because they trap air in their lungs and have a hard time getting air out of their lungs.
water is something that all animals need to live.
one of the most common is in use under welding, where it is mixed with acetylene to get a very hot flame.
it is made to carry a large amount of oxygen.
this is why blood is red.
the blood needs a to be at a ph of 7.4.
if it is much more or less than 7.4 a person can get very sick or die.
white blood cells kill things that do not belong in the body.
but they also go out of the blood too.
they also go out of the blood in places where there is infection.
if it happens in a blood vessel going to the heart, it can cause a heart attack.
the city is divided into 23 city districts.
the number of people living in the country is about 144,000,000.
this king was called a tsar.
and because of that place of ussr in un come to russia.
there are many art galleries, and the collection of art there is so big that it could take three years to go around.
the best known mountain in st.
the area was put under the control of the league of nations for 15 years.
the language they speak is icelandic.
in most countries people use to call other people by their surname, but in iceland people call other people by their first name.
it is based on the life and teachings of jesus of nazareth.
they believe that jesus was born the son of god and the messiah (christ).
his birth was prophesied many years before he was born, and can be found in the old testament.
worship is thought by most christians to be a very important part of christianity all through its history.
this would mean that because god created all humanity, then christians should worship and give praise god.
the word is taken from the latin word "sacramentum", which was used to translate the greek word for "mystery".
some events that are part of this calendar are the holy days, such as solemnities which honor an event in the life of jesus or the saints, times of fasting such as lent, and other events, such as memoria.
even though christians have many differences of beliefs and opinions, they share some beliefs that they believe are very important to their faith.
the most basic part of christianity is the belief in jesus as the son of god and messiah (christ).
though this, they believe they are given salvation and the promise of eternal life.
as fully god, he defeated death and came back to life again.
but the time of jesus' adulthood the week before his death are written much about in the gospels.
christians believe the the resurrection of jesus to be the main part of their faith (see) and the most important event in human history, because it would show that that jesus has power over death and have the authority to give people eternal life.
arguments over the death and resurrection of jesus are very common at many religious debates and interfaith dialogues.
the unitarian church is one of the few denominations where the resurrection of jesus is not taught.
protestantism teaches that eternal salvation is a gift that is given to a person by god's grace.
this would mean that salvation is god bringing humans into a right relationship with god through faith in jesus christ.
many protestants believe in the "assurance of salvation"—that god can put confidence in a believer that he has has truly received salvation from jesus christ.
it is believed by christians that they were written by people who were inspired by the holy spirit, and therefore it is most often believe to be the word of god.
most christians believe that humans beings will receive judgement from god and are given either eternal life or eternal damnation.
christians believe that at the second coming of christ at the end of time, all who have died will be resurrected from the dead for the last judgment, when jesus will establish the kingdom of god.
people who call themselves christians may show or live their faith in different ways.
they may also believe different things.
some believe christianity is smaller and does not include all these churches.
the argument was about the nature of jesus.
this was also discussed at the council of chalcedon, about 50 years later.
it is called the great schism.
this led many thinkers over the years to come up with new ideas and to break away from the pope and his church.
the main worship service in catholic churches is the mass and the main worship service in many orthodox churches is called the divine liturgy.
then the people each may receive a portion.
they also may visit a church building to pray in the presence of the eucharist, eucharistic adoration.
groups outside the three big groups of denominations.
there are other denominations that do not fit into the three largest categories.
while some of these groups see themselves as christian, many of the other christian groups do not agree that they are.
most of them do not believe jesus is god, or do not believe in the trinity, or for other reasons do not believe what other christians believe.
christianity has large history from the time of jesus and his apostles to the present time.
although it was originally persecuted under the roman empire, it became the state religion in the end.
in most countries in the developed world, the number of people going to church who claim to be christians has been dropping over the last few decades.
some believe that this is only because many no longer use regular membership in places, for example churches, while others believe it is because people may be thinking that religion is no longer important.
it has been a state since 1990.
russian is one of the six official languages of the united nations.
it has more people than any other state in the united states.
if california were a country it would have the sixth largest total production in the world, more than many other countries put together.
many of the great changes in technology and law come from california, and the state pays more to the u.s.
in 1849, gold was suddenly found and the number of people went up very fast as the gold rush took hold.
at first, travel between the far west and the east coast of the united states was dangerous and took a lot of time.
meanwhile, more people in california were learning that the land there was very good to grow fruit and other crops.
it is the only state that has more people than the country of venezuela.
starting in 1965, the variety of people became much greater as many different people from around the world came to the united states and often decided to live in california.
this information has been designed to make people feel a certain way or to believe a certain thing.
it is hard to tell whether the information is true or false.
but in first world war, it came to mean 'political ideas that are supposed to be misleading'.
there it can be very useful.
sometimes it keeps the people of a country happy - telling them that their country is fighting well and telling them how important it is that the enemy is defeated.
sometimes it tries to make people hate the enemy.
the information could tell people that the enemy is evil or make them seem not human.
sometimes a government gives propaganda to the enemy - telling them that the war is going badly for them and that they should stop fighting.
a group may try to change the way people act towards an issue.
it is the largest city in california.
the weather is usually warm and dry during the summer, and it is cool and rainy in the winter.
the weather is different depending on how far away from the ocean you are, so places near the beach usually do not get as hot in the summer.
astronomers think there are a very large number of stars in the universe.
they are usually thought to be between 1 and 10 billion years old.
when seen in the night sky without a telescope, some stars appear brighter than other stars.
if one star is much closer than another otherwise similar star, it will appear much brighter, in just the same way that a candle that is near looks brighter than a big fire that is far away.
if one star is much larger or much hotter than another star at about the same distance, it will appear much brighter, in just the same way that if two fires are the same distance away, the bigger or hotter one will look brighter.
this happens when they are close together.
there are even groups of three or more stars orbiting each other.
people think that stars are made in nebulas.
such stars are said to be on the main sequence.
they still keep some other rights.
a person who has copyright can choose which one they want to use when they publish their work.
a leg is something used to support things; to hold them up.
birds and humans have two legs.
centipedes and millipedes have a lot more legs, but not exactly a hundred or a thousand as their names make people who do not know them think.
yellow is a sign of cowardice.
it is used to mean this because it is easy to see.
some parts of the stadium were not used while the work was being done.
the stadium is now fully open.
the club has set up many events, while the team has won many awards.
a large number of jewish people also moved into poland during that time.
it is also the official language of poland.
in 2007 number of people leaving the country was lower than people who are coming back.
the largest number of ethnic poles outside of the country can be found in the united states.
as many as a billion people speak it as a second language.
she was a powerful queen who ruled for more than 40 years.
james was unpopular with a lot of people because he was roman catholic.
james left the country without a fight and parliament asked william and mary to become king and queen together.
it is on the north of island great britain.
some people in scotland now want independence again for their state and it to become a country.
on the west coast and in the north are a lot of islands.
to the north was land not owned by the romans — caledonia, by name.
some people do not want to join the republic of ireland or remain part of the u.k.
it is the main part of the united kingdom.
thousands of people from great britain had gone to live in brittany in the seventh and eighth centuries.
the manager of the club is sam allardyce.
they came close but did not win it until 2005 and 2006.
but the owner of the stadium put the rent up so much the club decided to leave and build their own instead.
at first it was only for people who went to st domingo's church, but so many people were interested they let people from the local are join as well.
some people who live near to craven cottage do not like having a big club near to them.
they made it hard for the club to be allowed to make the changes.
this is why the changes took a long time, even though it was easy work for the builders.
was created on march 15th 1892.
the stadium they play in is anfield.
the last trophy they won was the fa cup in may 2006.
it was called this because baseball had been played there much earlier beforehand, and it became their home for the next 102 years.
then they did even better next season by finishing first, and going back up to the top division.
a lot of people in england thought after the match that the italian club had paid money to the referee as a bribe.
it was exactly 100 years since the club formed, and just nine years after their last championship.
he kept his job for just 3 months before he was sacked.
it was a bad time to go down.
when these two teams play, there are very few empty seats and the crowd is usually louder than any other game.
they have won the fa cup once.
he also won the world cup for england.
they are from the city of sunderland.
their home stadium is called the hawthornes.
this ground is owned by crystal palace f.c.. they stayed there for the next 12 years.
they said that there were too many clubs in london, that not enough people were coming to watch the matches.
this meant that they didn't collect enough money at the gate to pay everyone and that is why they could not afford to stay.
when they said what they wanted to do, most of their fans stopped paying to see matches, which meant that they had even less money to pay everyone.
most things they have to decide are easy but this was not easy to decide.
or maybe they knew what to decide but didn't want to be the ones to decide it.
so they asked three clever men to study the problem and tell them what would be best to do.
these three men said that the club should be allowed to move.
some members of the committee did not like this decision and tried to stop it.
said that they would get a judge to decide (in a court) if anyone tried to stop them.
it costs a lot of money to go to court and whoever loses has to pay for everybody.
the other clubs would not agree to pay if this happened, so the fa had to agree to the move.
but it was already too late for the owners of wimbledon f.c.
they had borrowed money from the bank to keep going but now the bank wanted its money back.
so this group paid back some of the money and in 2003, the club moved to milton keynes.
they believe that a club belongs to a town and it is not like a furniture shop that closes down in one town and opens in another town.
another reason that they didn't like it is that they would love to see their own club get into the football league.
the only way that they can do that is if they win their regional league, then win the conference.
they are thought of as hard working but having no chance of success.
next to the city lies the cities bochum.
some people also grow vegetables or fruit in their gardens.
very often those leaders will also decide the laws.
the decision is made based on the number of votes.
direct democracies are not used to run countries, because it is hard to get millions of people to get together all the time to make laws and other decisions.
this is a much more common kind of democracy.
large communities like cities and countries use this method, but it may not be needed for a small group.
the participants in the council would change every year and the amount of people in the council is maximum 500.
the greek citizens would pick a leader by writing the name of their favorite candidate on a piece of stone or wood.
games are played for fun and enjoyment.
one person can play a game, or many people can play a game.
some games have many rules and are more complicated some games have few rules and are very simple.
games can be played on a computer, or they can be played with a ball or board.
we use time to measure the past, the present and the future.
the number of orbits it makes around the sun is measured in "years".
the study of time measurement is horology.
sometimes we want to talk about larger or smaller measurements.
a prefix is something to the beginning of a word to make a word.
it is named after lord kelvin.
language families and languages
language families are groups of languages that are related to each other because they come from a common older language.
most languages belong to a language family, but some languages do not.
these languages are called language isolates.
each game starts with the pieces set in the same way, which you can see in the picture.
a pawn is placed in the square right in front of each piece.
each piece can only move in a special way.
a piece also cannot move through squares that have other pieces on them.
however, a piece can end its move on a square that has an enemy piece on it.
when a player makes a move that will let him or her capture the enemy king on the next move, the enemy king is said to be in "check."
the player whose king is in danger must use a turn to save the king.
a player might save the king by moving the king out of the way, capturing the dangerous piece, or moving another piece between the dangerous piece and the king.
if white loses the queen, white is at a serious disadvantage, because black has more pieces out of the starting position than white.
it was especially admired as jewelry in early times because of its great luster and beauty.
in exodus it was used as part of the clothes the priests wore.
when it is used in money or in jewelry, it is often mixed with silver or some other metal to make it harder.
the word for 100 in latin is "centum".
it is the only si unit left that is defined such that it needs to be compared to some object.
the problem is now that some of these copies have gained or lost some mass.
they no longer weigh the same.
the second in role playing games.
sometimes in rpgs a second is used to refer to a small period of time or a single turn of combat.
the study of human beings is called anthropology.
it is used for these signs because it can easily be seen even at night.
many say they have been there since the neolithic period at the end of the stone age, others say even before then.
the idea, or theory, often causes arguments among scientists, because there is no way to test it to see if it is true.
these strings are so small that even when looked at very closely they look like points.
the reason scientists had not thought of this idea for so long is that strings are much harder to work with than points.
for example, if by following the path of a spiral, it is possible to go a great distance along it without moving very far.
the 6 other directions can be thought of as tiny spirals - strings can move along them a great distance but not seem to move.
a trick that has little to do with the real world that can be seen and touched.
such tricks are allowed, if they give a theory that can better tell us how things work.
each version allows different kinds of strings and says they work in different ways.
the fact that these dualities existed had been known before witten came up with the idea of m-theory.
but on the whole it is thought to be a good method for finding out things about the world which are reliable, and is the model for thinking about scientific knowledge usually used by scientists.
this is a question we might want to ask.
now that we have the question, we need to come up with a hypothesis which can be tested.
in any case we will know part of the answer to our first questions.
we will want to make sure that we use the exact same amount of water in each trial, and the exact same amount of sugar.
if we did not have the same number of either, we might influence the experiment in a way that would make it impossible to tell if the change in temperature was what was changing the speed of dissolving.
to be extra careful, we would also run the experiment in a way that the water temperature does not change during the experiment.
this is called "isolating one variable" — which means making sure that only one thing is being changed each time.
we have no reason to think that this is true at this time, but we might want to note it as another possible answer.
by not changing the temperature, we would know if it was the pot which was causing the change in dissolving, if there was any change at all.
but this would be a different experiment.
this means that they can freely move and expand to fill a container.
this happens when there is an air in the last 7 to 8 inches of the colon.
a family is a group of people who must have consanguinity and live together.
they share the housework and take care of one another, the member of the family have responsibility for each other.
a single-parent family is one where either the mother or father is caring for the children in the family.
sometimes there is a divorce, and a family is split between the husband and the wife.
a judge will decide if and when children live with their mother or father.
if the parents re-marry, the children of their new husband or wife are their stepchildren.
families are very different in this day and age!!
a wave is a type of change that moves from one place to another.
the highest point on a wave is called the peak.
though lowest point is called the trough.
the part of the wave half way in between the peak and the trough is called the baseline.
some waves can move through matter while others cannot.
light waves can move through space.
a weapon is an object that can be used to attack or injure a person or animal.
some of the oldest remains that we have of ancient people are weapons made of stone.
after people learned to make things of metal, many people used swords.
people also built huge machines which could throw rocks to destroy the walls of enemy cities.
people continued to invent new weapons.
now many people are concerned about weapons of mass destruction, weapons that can kill many people very fast, and are usually cheap and easy to make and use.
another kind of weapon of mass destruction is disease germs, which could be used to make many people sick and maybe kill them.
there are also many land mines which have been buried in the ground in many countries, and which kill and injure many people every year.
old weapons still kill many people in wars and fighting.
people sometimes try to make laws, treaties, and international agreements to try to control weapons because they are worried about all the killing done with them.
a country may say that people in that country cannot keep or use guns, or that people can only keep guns when the government says it is okay.
countries may agree with each other that they should not use certain weapons against each other, or should not have a lot of missiles.
it is made to be eaten at christmas.
it can also be called fruitcake.
it usually contains a small gift, a paper hat and a joke.
it is for stopping dirt getting on the door.
a inkpad is a small box that has ink on a thick piece of cloth or other material.
it is in south east london.
it is in south west london.
it has a lot of people from the caribbean.
it has a big market and many nightclubs.
it is next to the river thames.
it is used many times a year to stop water damage to london's low lying areas up the river.
many books have been written about the thames.
a queen is the female head of a royal family.
sometimes she is the wife of a king, but sometimes the queen is the ruler and her husband is not a king.
if the ruler is male they are called a king.
if female they are called a queen.
the wife of a king is also called a queen.
however the husband of a female ruler is not called a king.
when he died he had no sons, so he was followed by his daughter.
she was also called elizabeth and became queen elizabeth ii.
she was married to the duke of edinburgh; but when she became queen he did not become king.
many people do not think it is good to have a queen, because she is not elected, though most people in the uk want to keep the royal family.
male is one of the two sexes.
the female gives birth to children with the semen provided by the male.
female humans are called women and their bodies are different from male humans (who are called men).
it has a big market which has lots of clothes.
it is also good for music.
it is an urban area
it is in south east london.
it is in south west london.
christmas is one of the holiest times of the year, when it is believed by christians that god sent jesus to be born and to live among people and to save sinners from a life apart from god.
the other important christian holy days are at easter when the death and resurrection of jesus are celebrated.
other festivals at this time of year include jewish hanukkah.
the story of how this happened is told in part of the bible known as the gospels.
the gospel of john says that jesus came from god to bring his "word" or message to all people.
the gospels say that many years before jesus' birth, prophets had told a promise to the jewish people that god would send them a messiah, or holy teacher.
his mother was a young woman called mary, who was engaged, but not yet married to a carpenter called joseph.
joseph found out that mary was pregnant and was upset.
he was wondering what he should do, when an angel came from god to tell him that the baby was the holy one.
this was a sign that he would take care of it like his own child.
an order came that all the people had to travel back to their home town, to put their names on the taxation lists.
joseph took his new wife to bethlehem.
this is where the baby was born.
the baby jesus had two lots of visitors.
on the night he was born, angels told some shepherds in the fields that they would find a newborn king lying in an animals' feed bin (or "manger").
jesus' other visitors were some wise men who saw a new star in the sky and followed it, until they found the house where the family was now living and gave the young child expensive gifts of gold, incense and a precious herb called myrrh.
it is more likely that he was born in the spring or the autumn.
it is a time for people to prepare themselves for two different things: for the coming of the baby jesus and christmas, and for the second coming of jesus, when he shall rule over all the earth in peace.
on the following day, the feast of st stephen, people from rich households would carry boxes of food out to the street for the poor and hungry.
many people would go back to work but employers would give gifts of money to their workers.
the holy days continued with the feast of st john and holy innocents' day.
there are traditions of the church, traditions which are public celebrations and traditions that are kept by families.
here are some of the ways that churches celebrate christmas.
it is the part of the gospel of john that says that jesus is the "word of god" (god's communication with people) who was with god before the world began, and who came to earth to teach all people to become the children of god.
there is a tradition in england which began in the temple church in london and has now spread to many other places for a service of "nine lessons and carols".
this is often combined with an appeal to the people of the city to give money or gifts to help the poor and needy.
family celebrations are often very different from each other, depending on where a family comes from, and the customs that have grown in particular families.
most families think of christmas as a time to get together with other members of the family.
people often travel from far away to be with other family members at christmas.
many people also see christmas as a time to reach out to others that they know might be lonely, and invite them to dinner on christmas day.
christmas is seen as a time for people of all ages to have fun together, for cousins to get to know each other, for grandparents to see their grandchildren and for the family to admire the babies that have been born during the year.
big family parties are supposed to be a time of joy, but unfortunately some family members often store up their troubles and have big fights at christmas time.
some families are pulled out of bed very early by children who want to open their presents.
in countries in the southern hemisphere, a visit to the beach or a swim in a pool is often part of the christmas day tradition.
the food differs from country to country and also from family to family.
there are often several courses, with special treats that are usually only eaten at christmas.
nowadays these are often bought from bakers, but many people make their own to a family recipe.
the tradition came from the middle ages when the pudding was used to preserve some of the fruit from the autumn until the mid-winter.
some families use old coins or silver charms.
white wine and beer are both served cold (beer is kept in a refrigerator).
the tree may be a cut tree that is bought from a plantation or taken from the forest.
a wreath of leaves or pine is often put on the front door of a house as a sign of welcome.
the tradition is that people who meet under the mistletoe must kiss.
there is also the story of the wise men who came to the baby jesus with three gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh.
for many centuries it has been the custom for people to give small gifts at christmas, and also to give generously to the poor and needy to help them through the winter.
in the 4th century, in a greek village that is now part of turkey, there was a good man who would secretly given presents to the poor to help them.
he was very popular in places where there were lots of sailors.
one of those places was the netherlands.
these contain warm greetings and may also have a letter telling all the things that have happened to the person or family during the year.
the jewish people celebrate chanukkah, although this feast of lights is not their holiest time of the year.
for instance, one car may be cheaper than another, but the second car may be more reliable.
sometimes paper is made from other kinds of paper.
this is an example of recycling.
not all paper is made from wood.
paper is used for writing and printing.
paper is often used for money.
paper used for money is often made in very special ways, to make it hard for people to print their own money.
paper can be used for cleaning.
some kinds of paper are strong and can be used in boxes and other packaging material.
the people of greece and rome learned to do this too.
paper was hard to make, and it cost a lot of money.
a nation is an area of land ruled by a person or group of people.
no one else can make rules for that nation.
some nations are controlled by a small minority who have all the power, such as saudi arabia, who hold the nation together with the use of this power.
some of these may also be combined.
the highest lawful authority of most nations is a constitution, which is a document which states clearly what kinds of power the rulers have and how new laws must be made.
many others are ruled by a single person who holds an "office" (position), such as a king or pope, or from a long legal tradition without an official constitution, such as the united kingdom.
they are used to make tools because they can be strong and easy to shape.
some metals are used to make items like coins because they are hard and will not wear away quickly.
lead is very heavy and dense and can be used as ballast in boats to stop them from turning over.
the elements that are above and to the right of this line are the nonmetals.
the use of metals is said to be the thing that makes people different from animals.
this is now called the stone age.
these were even harder and stronger than bronze and this was an advantage in war.
the time of iron tools and weapons is now called the iron age
many people thought that finding metals was a way to get rich.
these are often called gold rushes.
it can mean a person from the country the federal republic of germany, or one of the earlier countries in the same area.
when talking about a person, it can mean someone who lives in germany, or someone who thinks of himself or herself as 'german'.
the religion that most people follow is islam.
they also began killing people from minority groups who might be against the new republic.
the dutch refused to obey the united nations who said they should stop the fighting in indonesia.
because of the fighting and the bad organistion, it took a long time for the country to become peaceful, and for the economy to get better.
property is something that belongs to someone.
properties can also mean the things that make something interesting: the things that give it its characteristics.
this is the land now called israel or palestine.
there were also many smaller crusades.
the strong belief made people less able to understand other people during times when there was no peace.
as a result of the first crusade, several small countries were created.
one was named the kingdom of jerusalem.
a main cause of the crusade was the desperate need for land and retaking jerusalem gave them both their holy land and land to live on.
this had led some people to believe that this did not really happen.
it looks like there were really two groups of people who moved, in 1212.
few returned home and none reached the holy land.
he could gather a crowd of over 30,000 and went to saint-denis.
there he was seen to work miracles.
the club was started in 1884.
the mouth of the mississippi is in the state of louisiana, south of the city of new orleans.
a tributary of a river is another river that flows into it.
if one river flows into a second river, then the first river is a tributary of the second river.
it enters the state of north dakota and then it turns south.
it was also very important in the history of the united states.
meaning of life
some people say that we will never know what the meaning of life is.
there are also ways of thinking called philosophies which claim to offer some answers.
we may never find out who is right.
it is an area of land.
it can flow directly into the river or go through tribes (smaller rivers that flow into the bigger river) first.
a myth is a story which may or may not be true.
this means there are no records or other proof that they happened.
we know about them from older people telling them to younger people.
they may have changed them by mistake, or to make them more interesting.
these animals or gods may have control or has power over a part of human or natural life.
for example, the greek god named zeus had powers over lightning and storms.
whenever zeus wanted to, he could make a storm, and that he made storms to show his anger.
it was said that no one could survive after an attack from this weapon.
one way of thinking about this process is to imagine 'myths' as lying at the far end of an imaginary line or 'continuum'.
the lake is called big stone lake.
the lake is on the border between the state of minnesota and the state of south dakota.
the source is a small lake on the border between wisconsin and michigan.
the river flows south across wisconsin.
north of the city of madison, the river turns to the west.
it flows west through the hills of southwest wisconsin.
the organisation is run by a group of twelve governors who have been given the job by the queen, on the advice of government ministers.
the governors appoint a board of management to take care of running the business of the bbc.
it also prints stories about programs and the people who make them and the people who appear in them.
the bbc has to publish a report every year, which tells people what it has done and how much money it has made and spent.
it allowed people to catch up on the last seven days of tv and radio on the bbc.
it is in the state of illinois.
it is one of the reasons that chicago became a big city.
because newborn babies have no teeth, they must be fed milk before they can eat solid food.
milk contains a lot of calcium, which is one of many minerals needed for strong bones and healthy nerves.
some people like to add other flavors to milk before they drink it.
not everyone agrees that milk is healthy for humans to drink.
some people think milk is good for children.
if milk is not kept cool in a refrigerator, it will spoil and become sour after some time.
this means it does not have to be put in the refrigerator until it is opened.
weather tells us what is happening in the sky above us.
climate tells us what kinds of weather usually happens in an area at different times of the year.
we wear different clothes and take part in different activities under different weather conditions.
we choose different foods in different seasons.
people try to use these measurements to determine what the weather will be like in the future.
many events have happened during this time including two world wars and advances such as industrialization.
two of the world wars happened at this time.
they say it is not secure and has lots of problems in it, for example, other people may be able to look at what you are looking at (spyware).
this is a list of famous mathematicians.
around 1900, the area was known as a resort, which is a place people go to on their vacations.
adults can be less than or up to.
its body can be from to long.
its tail can be from to long.
the tail and back feet help it to turn left or right, but does not make it faster.
it digs these animals out of the bottom of the river with its nose, or catches them while swimming.
these holes are between and long.
it makes these holes in the riverbank a little above the water.
it likes them hidden under roots.
when the babies come out of the eggs after about 10 days, they hold on to the mother.
the mother makes milk for the new babies.
at 6 weeks the babies have fur and are able to leave the burrow for short trips.
the water there is no good because people used it to grow plants, and cleared the trees from the land.
it is strange that the platypus does not live in some healthy rivers.
they thought an asian had made it from pieces of different animals.
many people all over the world had never heard of the platypus.
the story told how hard it is to raise platypus babies in zoos.
they say this because people can make the water unsafe for the platypus.
many different languages are spoken in kenya.
he however has come under heavy criticism as some feel the reforms that were needed are slow to come.
many kenyans living in diaspora have began to return to kenya as the promise of the future has created a plenty of high paying jobs that are appealing to foreign educated kenyans.
they usually have a seat for the driver and at least one passenger.
some are also able to carry many passengers.
they are used in many countries around the world.
another good thing is that if it's raining heavily it is better to use a car than a bike or walking because driving a car in these conditions can be less dangerous.
if two cars crash they can hurt the people inside or around them.
where athletes try to jump as far as they can.
the athlete runs as fast as they can down the run way to the jumping pit which is made of sand.
when they are at the mark where they are told to jump, the athlete jumps as far as they can into the sand pit.
elizabeth ii of the united kingdom
she is the queen each country separately, but she lives in the united kingdom, her oldest "realm".
her family has reigned over parts of the united kingdom for more than a thousand years.
the 16 countries of which she is queen are known as commonwealth realms.
she has a very good understanding of politics, but she does not tell the government what to do.
in the united kingdom, she is very interested in the running of the nation, and has regular meetings with her government ministers.
her father was the second son of king george v and brother to the prince of wales.
because the princess would one day be the head of the church of england, she was taught religion by the archbishop of canterbury.
the queen has always been a devout member of the church of england.
at the time of her birth, she was third in the line of succession to the throne.
but when she was born, there was no reason for people to believe that she would become queen.
everyone thought that one day, her uncle would get married and have children.
but even though her uncle married, he and his wife never had children.
he wanted to marry a woman who was divorced.
queen mary also gave the princess lots of good advice on how to behave like a queen.
and the king will never leave [england]."
she spoke to other children who had been evacuated.
she fell in love with him and began writing to him when he was in the royal navy.
she enjoyed training with other young women, and decided to send her own children to school rather than have them educated at home, the way she and her sister were.
prince philip was not rich, he was greek orthodox and his sister had married someone who was thought to be a nazi, so there were some people who were not happy about the marriage.
even though people were still very poor because of the war, the royal couple received 2,500 wedding presents from all around the world.
they returned to the united kingdom immediately by plane.
they now have their own governments.
she works hard to keep peace and good communication between all the nations that are members.
ever since she became the queen, elizabeth has spent about three hours every day "doing the boxes".
the "boxes" are two large red boxes that are brought to her from the parliament every day.
she takes a strong interest in the government of her other realms.
the decision of the people was to remain a monarchy.
the queen visited australia the following year and said that she would continue to serve australians as she had done for 48 years.
the queen has shown a very strong sense of duty, ever since she was a girl.
the "coronation oath" that she would serve her people all the days of her life has always been very important to her.
but she refused to be rude to him by keeping away.
many of the duties have been shared by other members of the royal family, who have also become patrons of many organisations.
some people thought that this was a sign that she did not approve.
but the marriage was followed by a religious ceremony in st.
as the queen has got older, people have sometimes worried about her health.
the celebrations were not so big as 25 years earlier, because the queen's mother and sister had both died that year.
people often wonder how rich the queen really is.
it is very hard to tell.
this means that she cannot sell them.
she gave it to many charities such as the save the children fund.
the queen has a coat of arms in each of her realms.
a question is what someone asks, usually when there is something that he or she does not know.
in writing, a question mark comes at the end of a question.
this is a question mark: ?
people may give a short answer.
people may give a long answer.
the handle is held by the human who will fire the gun.
in modern armies every soldier has a firearm as part of his or her equipment which they are taught to use and keep in good working order.
depending on the gun, people need to be a certain age and may need to meet other criteria to get such a permit.
in some countries, such as australia, people on farms are allowed to keep guns but it is difficult for a city person to own a gun without a good reason.
people do it because they like it.
some people even learn about dog breeding.
an hour is equal to 60 minutes.
24 hours are equal to one day.
it is not a proper si unit of time like the second.
it can be used to keep warm or dry.
it may be worn to make a person look good.
to study is to try to learn something.
there are many different ways to study something.
the head is the part of the body where the brain is.
it is also where the face is.
an example of this is the word "headline", meaning large words on the front page of a newspaper.
even though it is a country it is special
the government has norwegian soldiers working in afghanistan, together with soldiers from other countries that belong to nato.
it has a coast on the adriatic sea in the west, and a coast on the ionian sea in the southwest.
to the north and west of the netherlands lies the north sea.
to the east is the country germany and to the south is the country belgium.
the land is very flat, and only rises a little bit above the sea level.
one third of the land is below sea level.
some people who do not live in the western part of the netherlands do not like it when people call the country holland.
those areas were called the netherlands.
the dutch people were allowed to keep all the areas they conquered.
later this part became the country belgium.
many people thought this was the fault of the stadtholders.
many thought they had too much power and wanted them to get away.
they wanted to give him less power and vote for the government themselves.
the dutch king was afraid the same would happen in the netherlands.
from then on people were allowed to vote.
at first only rich men were allowed to vote.
when she and her family were hiding for the germans, she wrote a diary.
during the war the dutch realized how it is to be occupied by another country, so some people thought the dutch should not do the same to the indonesians.
that means the country has a king or queen, but the real power is in hands of a parliament, chosen by the dutch people.
all dutch people who are 18 or older are allowed to vote.
in fact a large part of holland was created by the sand that came from the many rivers flowing through it.
it is the fifth smallest country in the world and one of the few landlocked countries in the world.
the atlantic ocean is to the west and south, and spain is to the north and east.
the country says that olivença is also part of it, but it is controlled by spain (even the united nations do not recognize the occupation).
the border with spain has been almost the same since the 13th century.
during the empire the front side usually had a picture of the emperor on it.
the coin was sometimes made of copper and painted silver in color.
it is also a dive in which the body is bent and then straightened before entering the water.
it is often used as a sponge for washing the body.
they fold them and tuck them to make them the right size.
people who are very tall or heavy have to have kimonos made for them.
they can cost thousands of dollars.
most japanese women do not know how to put on a kimono by themselves because it is very difficult.
they help people to put on their kimono.
a group of people has a separate culture when that group sets itself apart from others through its actions.
not everyone agrees on the meaning of culture.
culture is more than just material goods, that is things the culture uses and produces.
culture is also the beliefs and values of the people in that culture.
culture also includes the way people think about and understand the world and their own lives.
a region of a country may have a different culture than the rest of the country.
by keeping their culture in this way, they express who they are and that they came from somewhere else.
it is also used to line food containers because many kinds of food which would stick to normal paper will not stick to wax paper.
many kinds of dry foods were once stored in wax paper because of its resistance to water.
people who study the tea ceremony have to learn about different kinds of tea.
this tea comes from the same plant as black tea.
many years have passed, but people still make tea the same way that sen no rikyu taught.
people do the tea ceremony in a special tea room or a special building called a "cha-shitsu".
when people go into the tea room they take off their shoes and sit on special floor mats called tatami.
then he or she puts some green tea powder into the tea bowl.
he mixes it with a whisk.
the guests drink tea from the bowl.
a tea ceremony can take from about twenty minutes to about four hours.
fun for some people can mean laughing, while for others it can mean crying, or feeling afraid.
then a producer hires people to work on the movie and gets all of the money that will be needed to pay for the actors and the equipment.
the actors memorize the words from the script that they will say in the movie, and learn the actions that the script tells them to do.
dramas are serious, and often about people falling in love or people who have to make a big decision in their life.
for example, a husband and wife who are divorcing must each try to prove to a court of law that they are the best person to take care of their child ("kramer versus kramer").
for example terrorists take control of a skyscraper and ask for a lot of money in exchange for not killing the people who work there.
for example, four brothers go off to fight in the 2nd world war and 3 are soon killed.
he and the soldiers who rescue him end up fighting the enemy and the soldier who led his squad trying to save the 4th brother is killed and becomes a hero ("saving private ryan").
some use their future or alien settings to ask questions about the meaning of life or how we should think about life.
but when you stop to think that very successful films can make many times that amount in profit, it is easy to see why the studios keep producing them.
these are usually made by small movie companies, or even just a small group of people that do not have much money.
they rarely make a lot of money, but if they are successful, the big studios will quickly try to get the people involved to sign a contract with them, by offering them a lot of money to make another film.
because different isotopes have different numbers of neutrons, they do not all weigh the same or have the same mass.
they have the same number of protons.
this was common for more than 4000 years.
death under the foot of an elephant was common for people who left the army or prisoners as well as for military criminals.
at this point, witnesses looked under the elephant's foot to make sure the prisoner was the one who committed the crime.
often, the condemned would scream and beg the witnesses to say it was not him.
the public could often see the deaths; this was the rulers' warning not to commit a crime.
he put thousands of people to death this way.
even when the crimes were minor, he sent them to the elephant.
the british wrote many things about it during their long rule of india.
one region put people inside of a bag, so they would not have to watch what was about to happen.
its huge feet kept coming closer.
some places made the condemned put his head on a special stand.
it must be large enough to literally scare or force people to go along with its requests, which makes them orders or commands.
this typically requires thousands of people in constant touch with each other.
also not every member of the network has the same role or right to help.
a person is usually a citizen of the country where he or she is born, but sometimes a person will apply to change his or her citizenship to become a citizen in another country.
no other land animal takes this long to develop before being born.
people knew for a long time there were different kinds of elephants.
these big ears have many "veins", which carry blood throughout the body.
this means that african elephants are even more in danger of dying off forever than people used to think.
their ways of acting toward other elephants are hard for people to understand.
he gave up everything to work out how best to live.
buddha taught that if people make good decisions they would be happy and have peace of mind.
he taught that we suffer because of desire, anger and stupidity, and he showed that we could end our suffering by letting go of desires and overcoming anger and stupidity.
buddhists sometimes do these things to understand the human heart and mind.
sometimes they do these things to understand the way the world works.
sometimes they do these things to find peace.
buddhists do not believe that people should look to gods to save them or bring them enlightenment.
the gods may have power over world events and they might help people, or they might not.
many believe the stories about gods are just there to help us learn about parts of ourselves.
there were buddhas a very long time ago, and there will be for a long time in the future.
a buddha is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the world works.
he was the one who would become the first buddha in written history.
he was born a prince, but he wanted to learn the answer to the problem of human "suffering", or pain.
he walked from place to place, trying to learn the answers to life.
after a long time, they wrote down the things that he may have said.
this means that these three things keep them safe.
they decided it was a black hole with a strong gravitational force.
this does not mean that the origin of such a strong force can not be something different than gravitational one.
john mitchell thought it was possible for something to be so big that the escape velocity would be faster than the speed of light, so even light could not escape.
most black holes are made when a giant star, at least three times bigger than our own sun, dies.
stars die when they run out of hydrogen or other fuel to burn and start to cool off.
even without a supernova, a black hole will form any time there is a lot of matter in a small space, without enough energy to act against gravity and stop it from collapsing.
it is because the period of being a super nova in a star life cycle is only a few hours out of the billions of years in a star's life span.
the probability of looking at a star in sky and that being in super nova state is equal to the ratio of an hour over several billion years.
the singularity in the middle of a black hole cannot be seen, because light cannot escape its gravity.
even farther away, light and matter will be pulled toward the black hole.
think of this as the water spinning around the hole before it falls in.
with a black hole nearby, even objects as big as a star move in a different way, and a lot faster than they would if the black hole was not there.
also, if a black hole passes between us and a source of light very far away, the light will become quite distorted, much like a fun-house mirror in a circus, until the black hole moves out of the way.
some black holes are also responsible for making quasars.
there are lots of famous bands from sheffield.
the military protects its country by defending it from the armed forces of enemies, if there is a war.
the military can also be ordered by the government of the country to attack another country.
people in the military usually wear clothes called a uniform, which is often in a camouflage pattern which is designed to make the person hard to see in the forest or desert.
there are two ways to join the military.
in other countries, there are laws that some people have to be in the military, even if they do not want to be.
it usually depends on age and fitness.
people who have been in the military but have left or retired are called “veterans”.
in most countries of the world, young men and (in a few countries) women between 17 and 18 and of good health may be forced by the government of their country to join the military and have military training.
when a person wants to join the military as a volunteer, they "enlist".
they have to be above a certain age, 17 or 18 in most countries.
they have to pass fitness tests to show that they are well enough to do the jobs that they will have to do.
they must also have good enough hearing, to hear instructions and good enough sight to use a rifle.
new people in the military are often called “recruits”.
they learn to understand the "orders" or "commands" that are given by the officers to the "troops".
they learn the right ways to obey the orders.
learning to march is sometimes called “drill”.
people in each of the armed forces are part of a group, that is part of a larger group.
all branches of the us military have both officers and enlisted.
it is usually their job to make sure that common jobs are done properly every day.
each branch of the military uses different names for the enlisted ranks, but they all use the same for officers.
a plate is a type of dish where food can be placed after being cooked for eating.
a plate is also one of the broken pieces of lithosphere of the earth.
they move very slowly in different directions.
they can carry disease and make animals sick.
terrorists think that if civilians are afraid of them, they will have more power over other people.
but a boy who hits his sister only for attention is not a terrorist (although it may hurt very badly).
terrorists may also be trying to make their enemies attack the people whom the terrorists claim to represent.
the terrorists do this because they think that the people who have been attacked will help them.
the prison doors opened by themselves.
he came back to prison with a newly born girl, the daughter of the king of vrundavan.
kansa tried to kill the girl but she slipped from his hand and rose into the sky.
as a result, the country has an official name in each language.
he called it this because it gave them a new chance to find a sea route to india.
not only was there gold and diamonds to find but people were needed to run shops, build houses and do many other jobs.
they returned 8 years later in 1899 and won the war in 1902.
much of the city was destroyed.
a day is the time it takes the earth to spin around once.
it is day time on the side of the earth that is facing the sun.
the phases of the moon are the different ways the moon looks during the month.
as the moon moves in space, different parts of it face the sun.
we only see one side of the moon from earth because it rotates so that one side is always facing us.
quantity or amount is how much of something there is that can be counted or measured.
this can be done by pointing to each one.
each time another thing is pointed to, the next whole number is used.
when the last thing in a group it pointed to, that number is the quantity of the group.
measuring is done with a ruler or a machine.
we put a ruler next to a thing to measure how long it is.
when measuring things, a whole number might not be the best answer.
a distance might be longer than 5 meters, but less than 6 meters.
this would be almost six kilograms.
many people agree that they influence our identity and they have a huge impact on our life.
he was the man who started buddhism.
later an idea began that there could be many buddhas: some in the past, some maybe in the present and some in the future.
buddhists believe that the buddha was enlightened, which means that he knew all about how to live a peaceful life and how to not to suffer in an afterlife.
he is said to have never argued with other people, but just said what was true and useful, out of compassion.
a buddha is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the world works.
this person can help others become enlightened too in a proper way.
there are ideas which are said to lead someone to enlightenment.
their poor understanding made them hard to teach.
several members of his family worked for the government of the state.
many people thought that the country should break into separate countries so that different groups could have their own countries.
while people of many ages can have schizophrenia, most often it starts in early adulthood.
the exact cause of schizophrenia is not known, although many things are known to influence the condition.
a small amount may never fully recover.
a drink is a liquid that you can take into your body.
to drink means to take a drink into your body.
all life needs water to live, most animals get water by drinking.
a need is a thing that a living being, plant or animal, must have to live or to be happy.
every person has the same basic needs for the body.
the need for water is the most important because a person will die very quickly without drinking water.
in a warm place food is the next most important need.
in a cold place, the need for clothes or shelter may be next most important because a person will soon die without these.
other human needs are not so certain.
these needs are for personal relationships.
it is true that a life may be better with these things, but some friends can be bad, or bad sometimes.
thinking about a need that is not possible can make a person very unhappy.
some of the study of philosophy is about questions like "what are the needs of a human?"
some scientists study the needs of human or animal minds and bodies.
it is not to be mixed up with free software.
this is called the hajj, where they follow in the footsteps of muhammad.
this is known as the qibla and this is the only place which muslims can pray towards..
all of the cities are on the coast, because everywhere else is covered by a big layer of ice.
it also had the right to leave the union.
there were a number of them.
a lot of countries used to have a monarch, but no longer have them.
some countries that still have monarchs have other leaders that actually have the power.
it could mean a unit of measurement, or a unit in an army.
this means that the town of x has come together to support the group.
a uncle is either a brother of one of someone's parents or the husband of their aunt.
that means "data" has not been changed or fixed, and you may not be able to trust it.
an airport used by the military is often called an air force base or airbase.
if it makes a noise, the officers will make that person take off all things on them that are metal.
the gas is so cold that when it mixes with air it cools the water vapour in the air to fog, which looks like a thick white smoke.
some people travel to other cities as part of their job.
it is one of the most watched networks in the united states.
it was the first network to air news 24 hours a day.
a leader is someone who has the authority to tell a group of people what do to.
it is actually made by factories.
the operating system is a collection of the basic instructions that tell the electronic parts of the computer what to do and how to work.
"open source" means that everyone can see how it works and change it if they want to.
this is one of the main reasons why some people like to use linux more than windows.
but because they had to pay to use it, some people tried to write a new operating system that would work like unix but would be open source.
anyone can see how the code works and can change it if they want to make it work differently.
open source is almost the same thing as free software, but people who know the difference between the names choose between them because of different reasons.
dogs are used by humans for many different things, for work and as pets.
they are sometimes called "canines" from the latin word for dog - "canis".
a dog is called a puppy until it is about one year old.
dogs can hear from a distance of 5000 or more meters away.
the usual life span of a dog from pup to an adult is about 10 years or more.
a dog in a group helps and cares about others.
dogs can serve people in many ways.
there are also dogs that are trained to smell for diseases in the human body or to find bombs or illegal drugs.
some people are called blind, even though they can see a little bit.
people can become blind because of diseases or accidents, but sometimes people are born blind.
this is why it is called the arctic.
a sin is something that a religion tells its believers is a bad thing to do.
religions that believe in god usually say that god told them that some things are sins.
for example, almost every religion agrees that it is wrong to kill people (murder).
there are other things that are sins in only a few religions.
they say that people should try to do the things that help other people, and not to do the things that hurt other people.
people who are not religious do not usually say that the things that hurt other people are "sins", but sometimes they use this word for these things.
summer is one of four seasons.
it is the hottest and one of the most dry seasons of the year.
four seasons are found in areas which are not too hot or too cold.
summer happens to the north and south sides of the earth at opposite times of the year.
a month is an amount of time used with calendars.
it is about one twelfth of a year.
it is a little longer than a natural period of the moon 29.53 days.
people have counted days based on moon phases for a very long time.
it is hard to find a job in alberta because there is a lot of people there, because they all want the oil
there are also a lot of farms in alberta.
farmers grow wheat and other things.
many things can be measured, and the measure can be explained by only giving the number.
suppose we are measuring a rod.
depending on the length of the rod under observation.
even some animals can see light polarization.
vectors can be used to show how fast something is moving and in what direction.
sometimes they break in the air.
it makes things move toward each other.
on the earth, we see that it makes things fall toward the ground.
it has a good protection from the mud.
when the women began to ride on a bike, they wore a long skirts.
now the woman bicycles made, so that the women can sat down on them in the skirt
it has two pairs of pedal.
one charge allows the distance 10 km.
you can charge it at home.
it is used even if there are not a hundred items.
the number is then scaled so it can be compared to one hundred.
writing is the act of recording information on a medium so that it may be read by others or at a later time.
it is only in the last few hundred years that most people have been able to write and to read.
until then, education was only for the wealthy or powerful, and because each book had to be created by hand, there were very few books available compared to the billions in the world today.
rock is used to mean many things.
other people in the stories often become angry with socrates because of this!
we have many dialogues that were supposed to be written by plato.
but because he was such a famous philosopher, some later philosophers said that their works were really written by him, to make their works seem more important.
a book is a collection of papers held together between two covers to keep the papers inside safe.
books can be borrowed from a library or bought from a bookstore.
people can make their own books and fill them with family photos, drawings, or their own writing.
books can be about any subject.
people who cannot read books are called illiterate.
these books are about stories that did not happen, and have been imagined by the author.
books of non-fiction are about true facts or things that really happened.
the first kind of book was a scroll, a long sheet rolled up.
the romans were the first people to put flat pieces of paper between a cover, which they called a "codex".
this way of making books was very slow, and so very few people had these kinds of books.
with the printing press, books become much easier to make and cost much less money to make, so more people could have books.
it does this because the sun appears to move through the sky.
at different times in the day when the sun is shining, a shadow is cast in different places on the dial.
it is also defined as a piece of land with water on three sides.
very few of the games that people play for fun meet these conditions.
they worked together in the 1960s.
if instead right moves first, there will be no more moves for left.
so both left and right can make a move to 0.
games equal to are very important.
blue is one of the colors of the rainbow that people can see.
murder is when one person kills another person on purpose.
if a person does something that makes someone else die, it is often known as manslaughter or homicide.
this is especially true if it was an accident.
sometimes, a death caused by someone else may not be a crime.
the word is most used when the person who was killed was a famous celebrity or was a person involved in politics.
birds are a group among the animals called vertebrates or animals with backbones.
this makes them lighter and allows many of them to fly.
because birds have a high temperature and use lots of energy, they need to eat a lot of food, compared with their weight.
different types of birds have made "adaptations" or changes so it is possible for some birds to live in freezing cold environments while other birds live in hot deserts.
many birds live on seeds and fruit.
some eat small reptiles and mice.
the way to understand the living habits of a bird is to look at its legs and feet, its beak, its neck and its wings.
birds with long legs need long necks to match, so they can reach their food.
the colours can either help to hide the bird, or they can help to attract attention to the bird when it is looking for a mate.
this is very useful when sitting on a nest.
water birds like herons often have a pale grey colour which makes it harder for a fish to notice that the bird is standing, looking down for something to catch.
many birds are not camouflaged but stand out because they are "pied".
this means that they are black and white.
they do this by pushing through the air with their wings.
the most expert "hovering" birds are tiny hummingbirds which can beat their wings both backwards and forwards and can stay quite still in the air while they dip their long beaks into flowers to feed on the sweet nectar.
large birds of prey, such as eagles, that spend a lot of time "soaring" on the wind have wings that are large and broad.
when the eagle sees some small creature move, it can close its wings and fall from the sky like a missile, opening its great wings again to slow down as it comes to land.
their wings are big and strong, because the birds are large and they stock up on food for the long flight.
they fly very high, making use of long streams of air that blow from north to south in different seasons.
every so often, they change the leader so that the front bird, who does most work and sets the pace, can have a rest.
it is thought that they do this to support the leader and help the young ones.
they often collect in huge flocks of thousands of birds that move together like a whirling cloud.
birds that are awake during the day are "diurnal".
bird like chickens that feed mainly on the ground and only use their wings to fly to safety have small wings.
they lost the power of flight.
they were killed and eaten by sailors until there was none left.
so can birds that live in hot climates.
other birds look for new partners each year and sometimes a male bird or "cock" will have several wives.
the male bird will do all sorts of things to attract females.
most birds make nests of one sort or another but these differ from bird to bird as well.
they make nests from little blobs of clay, often on a beam near the roof of a building where it is well sheltered.
it lays its egg in the nest of some other bird and leaves it for strangers to care for.
there might be just one egg or a number of them, called a "clutch".
one of the good things about the fact that most birds stay together for the whole nesting time is that the work is shared.
this is not always the case.
with emperor penguins it is also the male that cares for the egg.
there is only one egg, which he keeps on his feet and under his feathers, standing in a big group of males without feeding until the chick is hatched.
during this time the female loses a lot of her body weight.
they get under any eggs that are in the nest and throw them out before they hatch.
that means that the cuckoo has the whole care of both parents.
baby cuckoos grow fast and are often soon bigger than the parents who feed them.
their mouths are open all the time and are often very brightly coloured so the parents can easily see where to put the food.
many birds, particularly those that mate for life, are very sociable and keep together in a family group which might be anything from 4 or 6 adult birds and their young to a very large flock.
when a flock of birds is feeding it is common for one bird to perch on a high place to keep "guard" over the flock.
it is also common for large flocks to send one or two birds ahead of them when they are flying to a new area.
all birds make sounds to communicate.
he found that each type of bird had a number of sounds which they made automatically, when ever they felt a certain way.
this told the other birds around it that something frightening was happening.
if a flock of birds were flying over a field, they would be calling "fly!
but a hungry bird, seeing something good to eat down below might start calling "food!
if other birds were also hungry, they would make the same call until more birds were calling "food!
sometimes the calls are longer and more musical.
the bird cannot change these sounds.
they always make them in the same way.
the bird is locked into making each sound every time a particular idea comes into its head.
the same species of bird will sing different songs in different regions.
a good example of this is the currawong.
this is an australia bird which is like a black and white crow.
one bird will take the lead and sing "warble-warble-warble-warble!"
all the other birds will join in and sing "wooooooo!"
the song changes from year to year and from place to place.
perhaps it was better at flying than "archaeopteryx".
birds are an important thing for people to eat.
many others are in danger or dead, because people have taken away the places where they lived for wood or farms.
the number of birds of these species has grown because of it.
some of these birds are popular because they can copy human talking.
because of this, some people trap birds and take them to other countries to sell.
some people have birdboxes in their gardens to give birds a place to nest and bird tables where birds can get food and water in very cold or very dry weather.
freedom of speech
freedom of speech is the right to state one's opinions and ideas without being stopped or punished.
sometimes this is also called freedom of expression.
most people think freedom of speech is necessary for a democratic government.
in countries without free speech, people might be afraid to say what they think.
without free speech, the government does not have to worry as much about doing what the people want.
some people say this is why some governments do not allow free speech: they do not want to be criticised, or they fear there would be revolution if everyone knew everything that was happening in the country.
the town is known for many companies that make watches and machines.
for many hundreds of years the town was run by another place named basel.
it tried to join with other cities in switzerland.
that is why the city has two names.
it does not change during the summer.
the eye is the part of the body that lets humans and most animals see.
this system also works for some blind people who cannot see light at all.
as some people get older, they might not be as able to do this.
this does not mean they have bones on the outside of their bodies.
other insects have complete metamorphosis, which means that the small insect that comes out of the egg looks very different from the adult insect.
the larva eats food and gets bigger until it turns into a pupa.
this means the insects help the plants make seeds by moving pollen from one flower to another.
this is good because, if they did not eat all the dead things, there would be dead plants and animals everywhere.
knowing what these words mean can help you know more about computers.
this measure is often used to find out the health of a country in an economic way.
in other words, a country with a high value of gdp can be called a large economy.
it is a sport that is most common between young children up to younger adults.
the aim of the game is to hit the shuttlecock over the net in a way that the other player or pair cannot hit it back before it hits the floor.
if the other team was serving, the first team gets to serve.
this was because world war ii was fought in areas which were not connected well by railroads.
un formed a working group in 1980 that works for making the number of chemical weapons in the world less.
libya is also destroying its weapons in the last few years.
relations between the two countries have not been good since.
there are many old stories about the life of the "buddha".
no one knows which stories are true and which stories are made up.
he was very kind and wise and wanted to change the world.
the king did not want his son to become a holy man.
he believed if he always kept siddhārtha happy, he would not want to become a holy man.
when he was older, his father found a woman for siddhārtha to marry at the age of 16.
he wanted to learn the meaning of his existence.
he decided to give up his worldly life.
he would become a holy man with no home.
he left his home in the middle of the night.
he looked at his family one last time.
he did not return for a very long time.
they do not do things they like so they can defeat their desires.
some friends and he went even further.
he thought there might be a better way than hurting himself.
he told himself that he would not get up until he had found "enlightenment".
the life as the first buddha.
he was not sure if he should teach his new ideas or not.
he asked himself if the world was ready for such a deep teaching.
but in the end, he decided to travel to a town called sarnath to teach the people his new way.
he said he was just a man who had found "enlightenment", and that any person can also find "enlightenment".
work hard for your own enlightenment".
he taught that pain is because of desire.
and he showed that there is a way to end desire and end pain by doing good things, not doing bad things, and training one's mind.
this is done to end pain and gain "enlightenment".
buddhists sometimes do these things to understand the human heart and mind.
sometimes they do these things to understand the way the world works.
sometimes they do these things to find peace.
he taught that people should not look to gods to save them or bring them enlightenment.
the gods may have power over world events and they might help people, or they might not.
north is usually up on most maps.
they can be carried around and have their own screens.
the word medicine can also mean special food or a chemical that makes someone better when they are ill.
infrastructure is usually built by governments and paid for by taxes from the citizens of a country or region.
a road is a piece of land which connects two or more places.
usually, a road has been made easy to travel on, for example by removing trees and stones so the ground is more level.
people have been making roads for a long time.
road building and care is usually paid for by taxes.
it is also one of the largest volcanoes measuring 60 miles long and 30 miles wide.
the oldest dated rocks are said to be about
a van is usually bigger than the regular sized car and is meant usually to seat many people, sometimes up to a total of 15.
it is used in drawing or planning.
it makes it easy to copy diagrams.
this is used to find mates.
television is another very common medium; it is said that there is not a community on earth where at least one family does not own a television.
a medium is also a person who it is said can pass messages between the living and the dead.
a phrase is a small group of words that adds meaning to a word.
in english there are five different kinds of phrases, one for each of the main parts of speech.
in a verb phrase, one or more words work together to give more meaning to a verb.
these people may do evil or terrible things because of their "possession."
as the reasons for epilepsy were not known people decided it was caused by evil.
they are also different because many of them change depending on how they are used.
an adverb is a word used to tell more about a verb, and it almost always answers the questions "how?
this is one example in which the same word can be both an adjective and an adverb but not in the same sentence.
it all depends on what the word is doing in the sentence.
most adverbs are formed by adding ly to the end of an adjective.
sunday is one of the seven days of the week.
sunday is the beginning of the week in the united states, but is the end of the week in the united kingdom.
crop trees reach a width of about 20 in.
a safety curtain is a curtain in theatre at the front of the stage.
it is made of material that will not burn.
the safety curtain may be lowered during the intermission and after the performance.
a safety curtain is there in case there is a fire on stage.
a safety lamp is a miner's lamp with a covered flame that used to be used in coal mines.
it is the year after the year 2000 and the first year in the 21st century.
this difference is sometimes called gender.
not all living things have a sex.
in humans, the sex of a person depends on what sex chromosomes that person has in his or her cells.
before babies are born, they grow either male sex parts or female sex parts.
it's hard for these people because they often feel sad about people seeing them as being different.
for example, they have male sex parts but they feel like a woman.
if they think really carefully about this, and think they should be the other sex, they can say they are a woman, and even get their sex parts changed to female sex parts.
it has a pointed end and a straight handle.
it is coloured black and not the one that looks like cross.
it is used to get rid of things that are blocking pipes.
it has rungs on it, which are places for your feet to go when you are climbing.
it is given through talking rather than reading a book.
a generation is often to mean the average amount of time between the birth of parents and the birth of their children.
it is also used to mean all the people on one level of a family tree.
sometimes people say children instead of offspring.
the other half come from the father.
what this means is that some genes have a better chance of showing up in a child.
the child may have red hair.
this explains why a person might look different from their parents, but look like their grandparents or great grandparents.
homophones are words that sound the same as another word but have a different meaning, and often a different spelling.
it can be measured using a rain gauge.
through history the need for people to eat fresh plant food to help them get through long sieges or long sea trips was known by some wise people but was often forgotten.
it was the first to be made by man.
the following table is to give an idea of how much vitamin c there is in different plant foods.
the amount of vitamin c in foods of plant origin depends on the kind of plant, the kind of soil where it grew, how much rain and sun it got, the length of time since it was picked, and how it was stored since then.
it was only realised in the 1920s that some cuts of meat and fish are also a source of vitamin c for humans.
it does not include too much or too little of any kind of food.
many people consider literature to be one of the best ways to learn about other cultures.
literature is usually the best books a country or culture has made.
the word imaginary is also used to describe something that you have imagined in your imagination.
this is a very common word in english.
it is used for cleaning spaces between teeth which cannot be reached by toothbrushes.
then it is no longer useful.
this song was not a national anthem then, but a song for people who loved the idea of a strong and united germany.
during the time of hitler, only the first part of the song was used.
this part of the song was difficult for some people who were not germans because it has words describing germany as a country that included land that was in other countries.
it gives examples of why something is true.
for example, if someone come across a cup of spilled milk, that person could look for evidence as to how the milk was spilled.
the substances at the start of the reaction are called the substrates.
the substances at the end of the reaction are called the products.
mountains are important to the life of many things on the planet earth, because nearly all the rivers begin in mountains and carry water from the mountains down to the flatter land where most people live.
mountains also form when some rock blocks move up and others move down.
they can be found in both water and land areas.
the height of a mountain is measured as distance above sea level.
they can either form on land or in the ocean.
folded mountains make up some of the highest mountains in the world.
fault block mountains are formed when parts of the earth's crust has been broken off into large block mountains are formed when two simultaneous blocks of land rise above or fall down leaving its middle part behind, when magma pushes up and forces top layers of rock (elastic) up with it.
it is useful because it is how much of a material is needed to make a hollow container; for example, how much wood is needed to make a wardrobe.
some units used to measure area are square mile and square kilometre.
air space is the area of the air that is controlled by a country or organisation.
you have to have the permission of the controller to enter their air space in an airplane.
a example would be to coat glass surfaces with liquids to look at them under a microscope.
so small children can not use this method.
it is also a problem for people with a cough or people who are vomiting.
in other countries it is normal for children and adults to use rectal thermometers.
a suffix is a few letters put at the end of a word to change its meaning.
prefixes are letters put at the beginning of a word to change its meaning.
by changing the suffix you can change the meaning of the word.
examples of a spice would be cinnamon and nutmeg.
spices can be used to give food an interesting and exciting taste.
a bank is a place where money can be saved or loaned out from.
or the bank can give out loans to people for an agreement to pay the bank back at a later time, usually with interest.
the people who run a bank are called bankers.
that means it travels at 5 miles per second.
it is connected to a data-logger.
most humans have two arms each, coming out of their body just below the neck.
on the end of each arm is a hand.
humans use arms and hands to do things to other objects, this is called manipulation.
some other primates have arms which they use to move around by holding onto trees or supporting themselves as they walk along the ground.
arrows have a sharp point at one end and usually a flight at the other end.
the rules do not let the golfer use over 14 clubs in a game.
some people use this word instead of religion, while others see a difference.
they may include how to live among others, or as a group, or in a certain environment.
many philosophers try to find answers to spiritual questions, although they say that there is no god or anything supernatural.
in all parts of the world those type of people have had ideas about spirituality.
children born this year are the oldest members of the post-rock generation.
it is a common year that started with a sunday.
a common year is a year that is not a leap year.
so if a certain year started on a monday, the following year will start on a tuesday.
these are the 12 months in a year.
there are 4 months with 30 days.
there is 1 month with 28 days.
a human or human being is a person.
this brain and the fact that arms are not needed for walking make humans more able to use tools than any other species.
there are humans living on every continent.
humans are part of the animal order of primates.
the things might be elsewhere, and the events may also have occurerend at another place or time.
so far, no animals have been found which have a system of communication th that is as elaborate as that which humans use.
humans like to understand the world around them.
wanting to understand things has helped many humans make important discoveries.
humans use more technology than any other animal on earth ever has.
humans use education and teaching to pass on skills, ideas and customs to the next generations.
humans are part of the animal kingdom.
they are mammals, which means that they give birth to their young ones, rather than laying eggs like reptiles or birds, and the female humans are able to feed their babies with breast milk.
humans belong to the order of primates.
they think it may also be possible that both came from a common species of human that they don't know about yet.
early humans may have moved from africa to other parts of the world in the same way.
up to about 10 thousand years ago most humans were hunter-gatherers.
that means they hunted for their food or gathered it from wild plants.
most humans at this time did not live in one place, but moved around as the seasons changed.
people now control and change the environment around them in many different ways.
most people live in towns and cities.
this number is expected to get higher.
in 2005 the united nations said that by the end of that year, over half the world would be living in cities.
humans are at the top of the food chain and are generally not eaten by any animals.
although it might look like humans have less hair than most primates they actually don't.
they can be a very pale pink all the way up to dark brown.
this is called a sun tan.
the average human male needs 7 to 8 hours sleep a day.
the young grow inside the female mother for nine months.
after this time the baby is pushed out of the woman's vagina.
the mothers pelvis bones are also not very wide because people walk on two legs.
in many poor countries the number of mothers dying is very high.
sometimes it is up to 10 times as many as richer countries.
many babies in poor countries often die early because of this.
this depends on many things including where you live.
everything from moving and breathing to thinking is done by the brain.
the study of language is called linguistics.
people have been doing some types of art for thousands of years as the picture on the right shows.
music has also been around for thousands of years.
music can be made with only your voice but most of the time people use instruments.
music represents how the people who are playing the music feel.
because there is no proof in these things people need faith.
faith can bring people together because they all believe in the same thing.
some of the things religions talk about are what happens after death, why humans exist, how humans began and what is good to do and not to do (morality).
some people are not religious, some people are very religious and some people believe a mixture of science and religion.
it was passed on by people telling other people, until writing was invented.
now people understand more and more about the world and the universe.
a war always involves the use of lethal force as both sides try to kill each other.
the people who fight in wars are called soldiers.
modern wars are very different from wars a thousand or even a hundred years ago.
white light is made up of many different colors of light added together.
the rainbow contains all of the wavelengths of light that we can see.
our eyes cannot see those kinds of light, but there are some cameras that can see them.
but it must be good cameras that got an special amoúnt of things
it is on the east coast of the country.
it is believed that he rebuilt a defense building in the 13th century on what is today the island of the old town.
rain are droplets of water that fall from clouds in the sky.
rain is part of the water cycle and is a form of precipitation.
relief rain usually occurs along coastal areas where a line of hills runs along to the coast.
moist winds blow in from the sea and are forced to rise over the land.
relief rain is also a very dense and cold mixture of precipitation.
frontal rain is when a cold front meets a warm air front.
the cold air front tends to come from the north west and the warm air front comes from the south west.
the water from the ground is evaporated.
it is a common year starting on thursday.
the rules and the amount of money bet are decided on before the event happens.
a market is a place where people go to buy or sell things.
the market is a good way of balancing supply and demand because prices change quickly to signal what goods are in high or low supply or high or low demand.
it usually moves very fast around the center of an atom.
the measurement given off by a galvanometer is different than the measurement given off by an electrometer.
an ambassador is a person sent by the government of a country to a different country.
the ambassador speaks to officials of the other country about any problems and issues between the two countries.
it was necessary to have a person in each foreign capital to have meetings and make negotiations between countries.
often an ambassador will live in the foreign country for a number of years.
an ambassador may bring people with him to help him and work at the embassy.
the only possibility is to send a person back to their own country.
in other parts of the world, such as some countries in europe, monday is said to be the first day of the week.
many people fear that there will be a large nuclear war some day.
tax is money that people have to pay to the government.
this money goes to pay people who work for the government and to pay for things that the government does.
there are lots of different kinds of taxes.
some taxes are based on how much money a person earns.
other taxes are based on how much a person buys.
there are also taxes based on how much a person owns, called property tax.
things like houses have a property tax on them.
the government uses the money collected from taxes to pay for things.
for example, people who work for the government must be paid, so some taxes are used to pay these people.
it is a peninsula, which means that water surrounds the state on three of four possible sides.
palm trees grow in places that have a warm climate and a lot of sunshine.
the summer is a great opportunity to surf the waves and enjoy the beaches.
a lot of people also like to visit the beaches on the west side of florida, such as near tampa.
it is the best selling game.
it did not make much money for nintendo and is considered a bad movie because of the bad job of making it feel like mario.
this means that new computers can play many old console games along with games made just for new computers.
even if his idea was never realised, he is the first man to have thought of the idea of video games.
sometimes there is also a cor anglais which sounds a fifth lower than the oboe.
at this time it hardly had any keys, but gradually more keys were added which made it easier to play the sharps and flats.
it emphasizes a set of rules that can be used in any time or world.
he wrote the song "always look on the bright side of life".
an enemy is a person or group of people who opposes another person or group of people.
in war, the enemy is anyone fighting for the other side of the war.
it has a river going through it called the river torrens.
he has a long tongue which he uses to grab enemies and eat them.
because a lake is not connected to any ocean, it is not a sea.
some lakes are very big and people in the past sometimes called them seas.
if there are not rivers flowing out of the lake, or they are few and small, the lake loses water only by evaporation or because the water flows through the soil pores.
where the water evaporates rapidly and the soil around the lake has a high salt level, as in very dry places, the water of the lake has a high concentration of salt and the lake is called a salt lake.
the sun and moon rise in the east.
the most common cause is a hole from a nail or screw.
if the hole is close to or in the side of tire, it can not be fixed.
the population includes all ages and races that live in that certain area.
usually population is about the number of animals or humans there are in a certain area.
when clouds are full they pour out rain but in cold weather ice crystals fall out as soft little flakes that are called snowflakes.
the word snow comes from an older version of english from a long time ago called old english.
sometimes, the snow will melt very fast and become water vapor, which is water in the air.
the sun and moon set in the west.
they are elected by the people who own part of the company.
in most countries that have a king or queen as their monarch, they have no president.
list of colors
this is a list of colors.
he was the first man to make telescopes so he could look at stars and other planets.
these rules are part of physics.
he then wrote a book which was a collection of conversations between three men.
the church then decided to kill him unless he changed his mind completely.
he said that he changed his mind to avoid dying.
the church forced him to spend the rest of his life trapped in his house until he died.
when people feel or think the same way about something, they agree.
sometimes it is important to write down or make a promise to what has been agreed on.
agreements are common in law and business.
for example, when a person takes out a loan or hires someone to work, an agreement is usually signed so everyone understands what must be done and in what time it must be done.
when a person agrees to do something or to "not" do something, that person is making a promise.
a vow is a special promise.
this means that they promise they will tell the truth.
it is where rain and snow comes from.
we see these drops of water as clouds.
clouds form in places where air full of water cools, usually when the air goes up.
this can happen
there are different sorts of cloud, because of how fast the air goes up and if the air stands still or is moving.
there are three basic types of clouds
it is a part of the water cycle.
a contract is an agreement or promise that the law can enforce.
the legal rules about which promises are enforced by the law can be different in different places (or jurisdictions), but a contract is usually enforced only if it is made by people or groups who want it to be enforced and who know what they are doing.
the contract will show what the person must do as part of his job, how much he will be paid, and so on.
if someone breaks a contract, another person might sue him or her.
the face is the front part of the head.
a pencil is usually made with a piece of carbon mixed with clay that has a wood case around it.
writing with a pen will smudge.
this was and remains the only deposit of graphite ever found in this solid form.
communism says that the people of any and every place in the world should all own the tools, factories, and farms that are used to produce goods and food.
the government would make sure that everyone had what they needed (called the socialist stage), until everyone understood how to share the right way (called full or true communism).
if the country was a monarchy, it would become a republic with everyone having the same rights.
eventually, once there was true communism, there would be no need for any government since people would share and get along by working together in small groups of workers councils run by volunteers.
some communists believed that in a democracy, people would naturally want to be communist, so they tried to make communist parties in their own countries win free elections.
people could be sent to prison for speaking against communism or the government.
many people were also tortured or killed because they were against communism or the leader of the country.
but the legislature usually did not have any real power and the laws it passed did not matter if the leader of the country or the communist party decided those laws did not work for their objectives.
it is a very important book in human history.
people who support communism say that this is because the people in charge of russia were not real communists and did not understand how to do it right.
many people have written their own ideas about communism.
this scared many people, and lots of communists argued about whether this was right and whose ideas should be followed.
today the chinese government is still ruled by the communist party, but they actually have what is called a mixed economy, and they have borrowed many things from capitalism.
it has the same music everywhere, but the words to the song are translated into many languages.
resurrection is when the body comes back to life after dying.
the resurrection is a key part of christian faith because it signifies that god was fully satisfied with the work of jesus in dying on the cross to save mankind.
he is also with us by his spirit in this world.
in both the case of jesus christ and everyone else's resurrection the bible makes it clear that the resurrected body is changed from the original.
this is because the human body in its current form is understood to be weak and frail.
most historians agree that the first monarchies were tribes or small groups of people who decided to let a war-chief or other leader pass on their office to their children.
an absolute monarchy is a form of government where only the monarch himself or herself is the only source of all laws and the monarch can make any law they want just by deciding it.
sometimes the monarch is also the head of the state religion and makes religious laws also.
all land and property in the country can be taken or given away by the monarch at any time for any reason.
the army and navy is under the personal control of the monarch and can be used for any purpose at any time.
the monarch can also pick who gets to be the next monarch and can change the rules at any time.
either the monarch has to obey the laws like everyone else, or, if the monarch does not have to obey the same laws as the rest of the people, there are special laws that say what the monarch can and cannot do.
for example, in the netherlands, if a member of the royal family marries without the permission of parliament, they cannot become king or queen themselves.
the army and navy may swear an oath to the monarch, but the real power to control it is given to the elected government.
both sides agreed to stop the war and leave the border between the two countries close to where it was before the war began.
its idea of human rights and freedom of speech are different from how other countries see them.
in certain parts of the country, the supply of food is not enough.
the people of this country do not have basic human rights as westerners understand them, nor freedom of speech.
they also do not have the right to travel to other countries due to the juche idea that keeps north korea in fear of foreign domination.
although the government says that the test was not dangerous, many other countries and the un, became very angry because of this.
it is called this because it was one of the first parliaments and many other countries have set their own up in the same way.
it is made up of
these people are elected by the people of the united kingdom to represent them in the house of commons.
the prime minister is almost always the person whose party has the most seats, but if the lower house does not think he is doing a good job they can call a vote of no confidence and ask him to leave his job as prime minister or have an election.
sometimes people use the word "parliament" to describe a legislature, even if it is not a real parliament.
the turing test is a test to see if a computer can trick a person into believing that the computer is a person too.
this means that we can make more of them if we run out.
for instance, if we run out of ethanol, we can grow some more corn and make some more ethanol.
this is a list of people who are known anarchists.
in the united states, some legal rights are listed in the bill of rights
cyprus is a country in asia, that is often counted as part of europe for reasons of culture and history.
the justice is under the power of the courts.
the students who finish the high school can join colleges and universities.
malta is an island country in europe.
because of this, it has many cities and towns that grew into each other over time.
with more growth, the cities and towns on the island will possibly soon grow into each other and become one big city.
malta is not using the maltese money anymore because in the 2004 malta became part of europe, this made some changes example by changing the maltese money into euros.
malta became well known as the base of the knights of st john.
therefore some names may be missing from the list above and you may wish to look into the following lists.
everything in this part of the universe was much closer together than today.
some of the light from the stars you see at night traveled for billions of years to reach your eye.
of course, if something else started out very close to where you were, but was not traveling toward you, it would be very far away from you now because of the expansion.
it took more than a month to know who won.
later he wanted something done about iraq.
the united nations refused because there was no proof iraq had any weapons.
bush sometimes has trouble speaking in public.
he would sometimes make a mistake or say something opposite to what he means.
a lot of people have made arguments against bush because of his views, mainly on the war in iraq.
it is formed from the remains of plants that lived millions of years ago.
burning it is not as common as it used to be, because it causes much pollution.
it burns with a clean blue flame.
an encyclopedia like wikipedia is a fine example of something that could be used as a reference.
usually this happens because admitting it would cause a lot of pain.
the other is the tama river which runs from the west to the east.
the city grew up under the control of the shoguns.
before then it was a small town on the sea.
this is a list of physicists.
it is harder than pure metals.
a body is the physical material of a person or animal.
the body of a dead person is also called a corpse or "cadaver".
the study of the body is anatomy.
here are the names of the body parts of a woman and a man.
the word body is sometimes used in other ways.
it is made up of two or more chemical elements, of which at least one is a metal.
a material is something used to make things.
material desire is a feeling in people when they want a physical material so badly that they can never go away from it.
the brain is a part of the body that allows us to make sense of the world around us and to change our behavior to respond to it.
it is believed that the full power of the brain is yet to be obtained due to the fact that we only use a small percentage of our brain.
ever since the beginning of the world, animals have always had a brain.
but what makes us different you ask?
that was not the only thing that was growing though...
how can i make things better?
the greater middle east or western asia is an area of land and group of countries in the continent of asia.
there are 23 countries of this region.
the countries are linked because they share history and most of the people of these countries are muslims.
and the areas called the west bank and the gaza strip.
the city was destroyed several times in its history, but every time it was rebuilt.
the most important of these times was during the second world war.
owners of buildings and realty from before the war are still fighting for the property taken by the communists.
a line is the path of one point moving.
a line has length but no width.
a line can be straight or curved.
a straight line is the direction of a point moving in a direction that does not change.
the point they meet is called the "vertex".
list of walls
this is a list of famous walls.
list of vegetables
this is why they appear in this article.
they all have their different advantages and disadvantages and they are used in different areas of astronomy.
this is a list of religions.
list of languages
in order to judge if a language is actually endangered, the number of speakers is less important than the distribution among age cohorts.
list of earthquakes
list of diseases
list of buildings
list of bones of the human skeleton
the exact number of the bones in the human skeleton is different in each person.
the first name for a new year will be the first name that was not used the previous year.
if the are more storms than the list of names for a given year, names are taken from an extra list.
the following names are used randomly.
list of stars
the following is a small list of stars.
the distance ranking in this list should be seen only as a guess.
there is sometimes a number in front of the "p": it shows the number of times people saw the periodic comet visiting us.
it made a system of letters and numbers (and sometimes a name).
this is a list of waterfalls.
this list includes quite a few masts.
burns like this can cause serious damage quickly.
the colour of a star is a measure of how hot it is, white stars are like the sun, blue stars are hotter, and red stars are cooler.
white dwarfs are not very bright because they are smaller than many brighter stars - not because they are cold.
they may weigh the same as the sun, which would make them very dense.
a star like our sun will become a white dwarf when it has run out of fuel.
near the end of its life, it will go through a red giant stage, and then lose most of its gas, until what is left settles down and becomes a young white dwarf.
this heat is what is left of the heat made when the star collapsed.
these are what is left of the star after all of its heat and light has gone away.
but less than half of them will be bad enough to disrupt their normal activities.
about two times as many women as men are diagnosed with depression.
most people who have not had depression do not completely understand its effects.
since it is not understood, many people with depression are criticized by others for not helping themselves.
no one cause for depression has been found, but there are some things that can be involved.
they are not used much now, because they do not work well, and they have many bad side-effects.
this kind of medicine can cause problems with many kinds of food and drugs.
there are 30 parts in the qur'an.
an accident is when something goes wrong when it is not meant to.
many of these things have not been scientifically proven to help acne.
birds are sometimes considered descendants of dinosaurs.
there were many kinds of dinosaurs.
they were the largest animals to ever walk on dry land.
scientists have a good idea of what they looked like, because of the bones that have been found.
one of the first birds was "archaeopteryx", but it looked much like a dinosaur.
the period began with the first stone tools.
the dates for this period were probably not the same everywhere, and are not always agreed, because these people did not write any records.
some groups of people were still in the stone age later than others.
they also killed animals for food and clothing.
people probably began using bronze instead of just stone in the middle east sometime between 3000 and 2000 bc.
their enemies were killed or arrested.
he was wounded in the war.
the government gave him the iron cross as a reward for fighting hard in the war.
he soon won the support of the party members.
they said that he would stay in prison for 5 years, but they let him leave after 9 months.
while he was in prison, he wrote a book with the help of his friend rudolf hess.
he ended freedom of speech, and put his enemies in jail or killed them.
all media had to praise the nazis.
finally the other countries in the world worked together to defeat germany.
during his short life he wrote more than 600 pieces of music.
many people think he was one of the best composers of music of all time.
his father gave up composing in order to teach his son music.
they were written in his father’s handwriting, so it is not easy to say how much help he might have had.
soon his father started to show off his son, making him play in concerts in front of lots of important people.
nowadays this would be called “exploiting” the young genius, but in those days people saw nothing wrong with allowing a child to be used in this way.
it is amazing that it seemed to do him no harm, and that he grew up to become the great composer that he deserved to be.
many people who heard him wrote about this remarkable boy and that is how we know a lot of what happened.
he went to italy where he heard music by many famous italian composers, including gregorio allegri who had written a piece called "miserere".
no one was allowed to see the written music so that no other choir would be able to sing it.
mozart heard the piece once and then wrote it all down from memory!
mozart wanted to take her to italy to make her famous, but his father wrote him back very stern letters telling him to stop thinking about such nonsense.
the next year he went to vienna.
they were to have seven children, but five of them died in childhood.
at the same time that he was working on this he was asked by a stranger to compose a requiem.
he died before he could finish it.
the number helps us to know exactly which work is meant e.g.
he spent several years working at courts of noblemen.
most of his life, however, he worked in a church where he was expected to write church music.
that made some people at the time think he was old-fashioned, but today we know that his work is the very best of baroque music.
most of them played several instruments.
he may have learned to play instruments from his father.
there is a well known story that there was one music book which his uncle would not let him study.
so the young boy took it at night and copied the music down by moonlight.
when his brother found him doing this he took it away from him.
we cannot be sure that the story is true, but it could well have been.
music was not often published in those days: anyone who wanted a copy of a piece of music usually had to write it out by hand.
when he was fifteen he went to the large town of lüneburg.
there was a new organ in the church and bach already knew a lot about organ building as well as being a brilliant organist.
they asked him to examine the new organ, and then offered him a job.
• he worked in a church where he was expected to write church music.
he became very famous as an organist as was invited to play in other big churches and to give advice on organ building.
there was going to be a competition between the two men to see who was better at improvisation.
in 1717 he was offered a job in the town of cöthen, where he would earn an even better salary.
the prince was very musical and a nice man to work for.
the organ was not very good and it was not used much, so bach did not write any organ music during this period.
handel wanted to spend his limited time in germany with his mother who was old and frail, knowing that it would be the last time he would see her.
as "kantor" he was in charge of all the music, both at st thomas and at another church nearby.
he loved his job and worked very hard.
many of the cantatas he wrote last about 30 minutes, and that was just one part of a service!
they are among the most famous pieces of music ever written.
life was not always easy, and there were sometimes arguments with the people who ruled the church.
at the end, the tune is heard in six voices all together.
in the last year or two of his life, he became blind in spite of two eye operations.
bach wrote so much music that it cannot all be mentioned here.
he wrote lots of music for his pupils, who were often his own sons.
there are lots of beautiful music in the cantatas, although they are in german and it is a help to know what the choir or soloists are singing about.
the penis is a male sex organ found on the outside of the body.
some men have the foreskin cut off when they are adults because they have problems with their foreskin.
it is surrounded by many forests.
here are four very famous examples.
the numbers below are not exact, since many of those killed were never registered.
the word for someone who thinks this is "anarchist", and the word for this kind of thinking is "anarchism".
the dna in a living thing is a mix of the dna from each of its parents.
he spent many years working on the three volumes of the book.
the book has led to many debates between those who agree with the book and those who do not.
the system in those countries were communist, and many of their governments killed those who disagreed with them, or put them in prison.
flour made just from the polished wheat grain gives a very white bread.
bread is an important part of life in many countries, because everyone eats it.
in many cultures, bread is so important that it is part of their religious rituals.
cake is done in a similar way to bread but sugar, fat and milk are added to the dough and often more ingredients.
vulcano's name itself is taken from vulcan, the name of a god of fire in roman mythology.
as a whole cosmos, everything is now flying away from everything else with no center.
redshift is when the light from an object moving away from the earth looks like it has lost energy.
when we see the redshift we can see how fast the object is moving.
it is now very weak and cold, but a long time ago it was very strong and very hot.
if the big bang was the beginning of time itself then there was no universe before the big bang.
foolish means silly or not wise.
true knowledge can be gotten from the thinking soul that turns away from the world.
only the soul can have knowledge of "forms", the real way things are.
the world is only a copy of these "forms" and is not perfect.
most of the things aristotle wrote that we still have today are notes from his speaking and teaching.
logic is a type of thought that allows us to decide whether an idea is true or false.
they were found again in the year 70 bc.
he said that people should look for life on other planets (seti).
he thought of the idea of putting a message on spacecraft which could be understood by any life from another planet that might find it.
although they all liked the way he made science popular, some were afraid that people would think that his personal opinions might be confused with real science.
what he said about the kuwait oil well fires during the first gulf war were shown later to be wrong.
but if by 'god' one means the set of physical laws that govern the universe, then clearly there is such a god.
this god is emotionally unsatisfying... it does not make much sense to pray to the law of gravity."
he started his life as a poet when he served his lord as a samurai.
those travels were important for his writings.
this book was written after a trip.
colonization is the act of one country settling another place, in order to become the new rulers of the new country, and to live in the new country.
they have to be thrown away after their chemicals are used up.
land battles were fought throughout south vietnam.
thousands of north vietnamese army troops were sent to fight in south vietnam.
it is located between the dry desert land to the north and the forest areas to the south.
it may be very dry in some years, especially if a large area of low pressure, which brings rain, is not carried north over the sahel by strong winds.
a physical change is a change in which no new substances are formed and most physical changes are reversible.
his father was a roman catholic, and his mother was a protestant.
his family was very poor and ronald did not have much as a child.
at this time all they would get is the scores so it would have been very hard for someone to come up with what happened in the game.
he would send some money back to his parents to help them out because it was the great depression.
it was started after world war ii with the idea of making a stronger version of the league of nations, that was supposed to stop wars from happening.
this is a list of historians.
the names are grouped by order of the historical period in which they were writing, which is not necessarily the same as the period in which they specialised.
after zeami followed his father and did his work to be the leader of his theater, he continued to play and change his style into what noh is today.
he went on a 25 year trip to china with his father and uncle during the mongol dynasty.
on the way there he had to go over mountains and through terrible deserts.
across hot burning lands and places where the cold was horrible.
he served in khans court for 17 years and left the far east and returned to venice by sea.
it is not very dangerous
and pain last 3 to 5 weeks.
most people who have shingles have only one attack of the disease in their lifetime.
this book is about physics, or the study of laws that predict how things work in the universe.
he talks about the ideas of philosophers such as aristotle and ptolemy.
he also thought that the sun and stars went around the earth.
the person who first thought of the idea about the earth going around the sun was nicholas copernicus.
these ideas are about the thought that events stay in place over a period of time.
this was found not to be true by newton's laws of gravity.
however, scientists found a problem when they tried to say that light always traveled at the same speed.
the top of the light cone tells where the light from the event will travel.
the bottom tells where the light was in the past.
when light goes past a big thing, like a star, the light changes direction because the star has a lot of gravity.
if one of the twins went to live on a high place (such as a mountain), and another twin went to live at a lower place (such as near the sea), the twin who went to live on the mountain would be a little bit older than the twin who went to live at the sea.
one of the things he uses to explain his idea is the "doppler shift".
the highest point of a wave is the crest, and the lowest part of the wave is a trough.
quarks are very small things that make up everything we see (matter).
quarks are known as the "building blocks of matter" because they are the smallest thing that make up all the matter in the universe.
black holes are talked about in this chapter.
black holes are stars that have collapsed into one very small point.
this small point is called a "singularity".
some of the things it can suck in are light and stars.
the star must be one and a half times the mass of the sun or larger to turn into a black hole.
if something is in the event horizon, it will never get out of the black hole.
black holes are difficult to find because they do not let out any light.
stephen hawking bet that black holes did not exist, because he did not want his work on black holes to be wasted.
this chapter explains more about black holes.
the area of the event horizon of a black hole gets bigger whenever something falls into the black hole.
he also realized that when two black holes combine, the size of the new event horizon is greater than or equal to the sum of the event horizons of the two other black holes.
this was strange, because it was already said that nothing can escape from a black hole's event horizon.
one of the pair of particles would fall into the black hole, and the other would escape.
this idea seemed strange at first, but many people accepted it after a while.
how the universe started and how it might end is talked about in this chapter.
his family was known for teaching people how to speak english clearly (elocution).
his father wrote often about this and is most known for his book on visible speech.
in this, he explains a way of teaching people who are deaf and mute.
it shows how these people can learn to speak words by using their eyes to read what other people are saying, and by watching their lips.
he hoped to help his deaf mother.
he made a piano that could be heard far away by using electricity.
his father was asked to teach about it at a large school for deaf mutes in boston, but instead he gave the job to his son.
he began teaching there in 1871.
his past experience made him ready to work more with sound and electricity.
he also worked to pass laws that would not allow deaf people to marry others who were deaf.
he was also against the use of sign language.
these things mean that he is not liked by many deaf people today.
deep house is house music that is as fast as disco music.
there are many different kinds of cytokines.
many people think his songs are always about himself, but oberst has said that they are not.
some people buy honey that is still in the honeycomb.
it was first spoken in greece and was also once spoken along the coast of asia minor and in southern italy.
greeks write their language using the greek alphabet.
the greeks got the idea of using an alphabet from the phoenicians.
these speakers mostly live in greece and cyprus, but there are also people in other countries around the world who speak the language.
it works best at a ph of about 2.
it will not work at a ph above 6.
there are a lot of ways for finding the ph of some chemical.
they are parasitic, which means that they need another larger creature whose body they can live on.
many animals that eat mostly fruit and leaves also sometimes eat other parts of plants, for example roots and seeds.
animals that live in these places may also change their diets at different seasons.
carnivorous animals have to find and catch the animals that they eat, and sometimes the animals that they want to eat fight them.
herbivorous animals have to find the plants that they want to eat, but they do not have to catch them.
this court was in bonn and it was here that he lived until he was a young man.
there he seems to have had one or two lessons from mozart, but then beethoven got a letter saying that his mother was dying, so he hurried back to bonn.
soon his mother died, and beethoven had to help to look after the family because his father had become an alcoholic.
some of these friends were musicians; others were very important people; many of them were aristocrats who would be able to help him in his career.
this helped him to be a great composer.
some of these people had already heard him in bonn when they had travelled there, so his name was becoming known in vienna.
it also helped that he could say he was the pupil of the famous joseph haydn.
however, he was far from happy because he realized that he was starting to become deaf.
beethoven seems to have taken his mind off these terrible thoughts by working very hard.
he went to the table where the score of the symphony was lying and tore up the title page.
she was a young widow with four children.
the next spring it had two performances but was then not performed again for another eight years.
it was not a regular income.
this meant that beethoven did not have to worry so much about money.
he was asked to write music for "egmont", a play by goethe.
he was thought of as the greatest composer by the viennese people and he was often invited by royal people to their palaces.
the last years were unhappy years for beethoven.
it is all about living together in peace and harmony, so that it sends an important message to people.
he knew that he was becoming deaf.
a young man does not expect to become deaf, but now he was starting to admit it to himself.
he was finding it hard to hear what people were saying.
just at the moment when he was starting to become known as one of the greatest of all composers, it was a terrible blow to realize that he was losing his hearing.
there he wrote a famous letter which is known as the "heiligenstadt testament".
he asks people to forgive him if he cannot hear what they are saying.
he said that he had often thought of suicide, but that he had so much music in his head which had to be written down that he decided to continue his life.
it was never sent to anyone.
most composers who live a long time develop as they get older and change their way of composing.
his first period includes the works he wrote in his youth in bonn, and his early days in vienna up to about 1803.
he thought that everyone was expecting him to be the next beethoven.
he was also the first man known to travel the northwest passage.
he was once called the first european to find out because people already lived at the americas, though it is known now that the vikings did this earlier.
he knew that the world was round but he did not know how large it was.
he had heard that marco polo had found a sea to the east of china and he believed that it must be the same as sea to the west of europe.
he did not really know about the pacific ocean and the americas, and that the atlantic ocean did not go all the way to china.
when he found some islands at the end of his voyage, he thought he had reached the east indies when in fact he had landed on an island in the bahamas.
that is why he named the people living there "indians".
they can also sell or give away copies of the program with or without any changes they made to it.
the license lets them do this as long as they agree to follow the terms of the license.
they can use it and make copies or changes to it for themselves, but they can not give it away or sell it.
they also can not change the license.
meat is an important part of the diet of many people because it contains protein.
people who cannot afford meat, or who do not like to eat it need to find other ways to get enough protein in their diet.
people that choose not to eat meat are called vegetarians, and those who do not eat any animal product are known as vegans.
if the sea level keeps rising at the same rate, this country will be covered by water in about 50 years.
it is an important area for growing crops in indonesia.
one of his most famous works is the "david".
he was an
yet he used a dark background.
he was also known for making his paintings in a dark style, in which there were many shadows.
list of rocks
this is a list of minerals.
everything people can see or touch is made up of atoms.
all the atoms in gold or copper are of the same type.
the most common group is the silicates.
though there are thousands of different minerals, only about 30 are
these 30 minerals make up most rocks in the
craft is a word for many different activities about making things with one's own hands and skills.
inside north korea, it is the law no one can try to replace him as leader of the country.
he is afraid to travel on aeroplanes and travels only on trains.
and now it is in question that he has or has not suffered from a stroke.
when it is used in money or in jewellery, it is often mixed with gold or some other metal to make it harder.
silver is not a large danger to humans.
the silver saved up in the world is running out very quickly because more of it has been used each year than the amount mined in each year since 1990.
this is called naked short selling.
the amount owed is more than all the silver in the world.
the price of silver could go very high when the stored silver runs out and investors start asking for their metal back, instead of taking more i.o.u.'s.
silver coins and bars can be bought and sold at coin shops around the world.
silver is one of the only words in the english language that does not rhyme with any other word.
this is no longer the case.
the pope is the only person in the world who is the leader of a political state and a religion at the "same time".
it happens often in very high temperature.
this is the first step in metallurgy.
it is then worked into steel.
these parts must be made so they will not break when they are used.
how to know what to do to the metal.
the most useful is the microscope.
there were gliders before this, but they had to fly by being pushed off a building or hill.
some large cities like new york city have more than one airport.
it would take one week or more on a ship.
it is named after queen victoria.
many people work for the government or in tourism.
there is a lot of rain but little snow.
it lies west of the sinai peninsula.
each ship takes up to 16 hours to cross the canal.
clothing is far more that just a means to protect our bodies.
they can be used for running in.
they are often used when it is cold.
coffee is a plant and it is also the name of the drink that is made from this plant.
this dries them out, makes them last longer and makes them ready to be packed.
it is made in a factory and sold in jars or packets.
this is then put into jars or packets.
in other countries, such as mexico, people drink it in the evening to help them stay awake.
it was found that if a woman drank between four and seven cups of coffee a day, it did not seem to make a big change to the number of babies that were born dead, (stillborn).
but the women in the study who drank eight or more cups of coffee a day had three times as much chance of having a stillborn baby.
there are different kinds of beef.
all species of hyena walk much like a bear because their front legs are longer than their back.
they work together very well and are very cooperative.
it was even used as money in some places.
silk is often used to make cloth.
among other things, they were so popular that thousands of people would gather outside the hotels they stayed in day and night meaning that they could never leave their rooms apart from when they played a show.
reincarnation is the name of the idea that people are born in another body after they die.
therefore, each reincarnating soul chooses a home and a family which can best fulfill its next step of learning and maturation.
at death the soul leaves the physical body.
but the soul does not die.
here the soul continues to have experiences until it is born again in another physical body as a baby.
when all desire has vanished, the person will not be born again anymore.
the soul has gone beyond the level in understanding offered by living on earth.
it will no longer be pulled back to be born in a physical body.
people can buy many things there as well.
then he studied laws in göttingen.
after that he worked as a lawyer.
there are many things to do in melbourne.
melbourne grew very quickly because people came from all over the world to look for gold.
many people from different countries live in melbourne.
this lake was created especially for the city.
but as canberra grew larger and larger, the lake was no longer in the middle of the town, but the people who are in charge of planning the city make sure canberra is as close to griffin's original plan as possible.
the first white people who lived there were prisoners from england and ireland.
lots of people go to sydney for the big party at new years eve with fireworks over the harbour.
a world war is a war in which most of the countries in the world fight or help.
there have been two world wars so far, world war i and world war ii.
this time when many people were afraid that world war iii might start was called the cold war.
but many people are afraid that if there were a problem with the reactor, the radiation could escape into the environment, harming or killing many animals and people.
he was 39 when he set foot on the moon.
they feel pain in their chest.
many people have tb in their system but do not know it because it is not making them sick.
but the disease continues to spread in countries where there are many poor people without enough food.
in english, the most common use of this word is to mean a person or a thing from the united states.
grain is the seeds of some special kinds of grass.
these grains are also called cereals.
people grow different kinds of grain as food.
the different kinds of grain are perhaps one of the most important foods in the world.
when we grind grain to make a powder, it is called flower.
different kinds of beer are made from the flour or wheat and other grains.
they have had a lot of influence in many countries.
most people need to work to get money.
it is this surplus value that makes it possible for carl to live on the work of peter and bob.
he can also use it to invest in more work and thereby make more capital.
a materialist is someone who believes that the world around us is made of material, that there are no gods or other supernatural things.
people use the word sacred for something that a religion says is special or important.
jews call their book the torah.
it is at the north end of the lake of zürich.
in the city of zürich, most of the people work in the commerce part of the economy.
translation means to copy writing or speech from one language into a different language.
a translator who is copying a book into another language may use a language dictionary to find out how a word is written in another language.
a translator who works with the spoken word is also called an interpreter.
a hacker is someone who likes to do new things with computers.
the correct meaning for this is "cracker", but many news stories use "hacker" even though it is wrong.
here are the most common kinds of socialism.
this is meant to give the government more funds, so that they can provide higher quality welfare.
many different countries do this in different ways.
in theory, this system results in the rich people losing money, and the poor people getting more money.
if this is used on a very large scale in a country, it is known as "communism".
these countries include cyprus and mozambique.
he said that workers should own the companies, which they worked for.
soon the government started to make mistakes and people began to think lenin was right.
she tried to kill herself near the end of the pregnancy, and did not want to care for saddam when he was born.
he escaped from jail in 1967 and became one of the leading members of the party.
he quickly became the most important person of the regime.
he was then left completely in control of iraq.
this was to calm down the religious parts of the society.
he had grown long hair and a long beard.
people who talked with him after the soldiers found him said he was healthy, and wanted to talk to people and do what they told him to do.
both witnesses and exectutioners could be heard teasing him as the rope was placed on his head, and he was put on the trap door.
list of oil fields
this list of oil fields includes major fields of the past and present.
anarchists believe that it is better for everyone to have a direct say in how things should be done, instead of having leaders or bosses make decisions for them.
the word used to describe people telling other people what to do is "authority".
they hope this would lead to a society where everyone has a say in outcomes just as much as he or she is affected by them.
once put into place these relations work on their own.
list of countries by area
here is a list of the countries of the world in order of size.
list of countries by official languages
this is a list of countries by population.
this page has the name of almost every country in the world.
this number shows how many people live in the country.
countries with the most people are at the top.
countries with the least people are at the bottom.
list of states that produce oil
this means that it can do many things at the same time.
most of them have a personal area where they can put things.
it is made of many protocols.
a signature is a special way that people write their name to imply that they agree to something which is written.
the way people sign things are different in different countries.
sometimes one finds a form where the person is asked to both
usually they make the drink by adding hot milk and sugar to the powder.
no less than 50 pitchers of the drink were prepared for the emperor each day, and 2000 more for nobles of his court.
people who live there speak french.
it used to be called the ivory coast.
a clean sheet is a game where the other side gets no goals.
secondly, the other issue here presupposes that god can only make mountains so large and asks if god can make one large enough to be "unliftable".
no because such a thing is illogical, not because it is too big or too hard to make.
the above argument falls short because it assumes that god is bound by the same logic as we humans know it and that he is a part of the same universe we live in.
if god is the all mighty creator of this universe he has also created its physical laws and the logic we use for this discussion.
so by the very definition of god there are no "illogical" or "impossible" things for him to do because that would limit his almightiness.
the only answer is that either god does not exist or we humans cannot resolve this oxymoron because we are not able to grasp the nature of god.
god does not follow human ideas.
god does not have to follow our ideas of what is true and what is false.
he can choose for something to be true and false at the same time.
this is supposed to be used to help the people.
but some libertarians think even the government has no right to tax people, and other libertarians think that the government should not tax a lot.
libertarians think people can take care of the poor without the government.
they believe that people should pay for the things that they want to use, but not have to pay for other things that they do not want.
libertarians think everyone can decide what is good or bad for their own body.
many libertarians also believe families and friends should look after friends so they would not use drugs, drive without seat belts, or do other things that are bad for them.
but no one can force others to things that they do not want to do, or to stop doing things that they want to do.
an auction is a place where people can buy or sell things.
people say how much they will pay for something and the person who is willing to pay the most gets the thing.
the amount people will pay is called a bid.
he usually has a hammer which he will knock when he accepts a bid.
that person will then buy the thing.
catholics believe that because of his love for all peoples, jesus christ died so that all of us will live forever in heaven.
the catholic church teaches that catholics should follow the example of love jesus christ teaches; to love each other so much that one is even willing to die for another.
these can be remembered by the following phrase: 3 for mary, 2 for jesus and 1 for all the saints.
through him all things were made.
for us men and our salvation he came down from heaven: by the power of the holy spirit, he was born of the virgin mary, and became man.
on the third day he rose again in fulfillment of the scriptures: he ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the father.
he will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and his kingdom will have no end.
he has spoken through the prophets.
we look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.
the rainy season is from may until september.
these are often captured with little fighting.
old tanks are often used for other uses like carrying soldiers or bridges.
the shows are of all kinds, and range from large ones with famous people, to very small ones by new or unknown actors.
there was a big fire there in 1385.
head of state
the head of state of a country is its highest leader.
however, the head of state may not have very much real power.
in a monarchy the head of state is the king or queen.
some countries have different systems - for example the head of state of the vatican city is the pope.
instead the most powerful person is the head of government.
this is usually the leader of the political party that wins the most seats in an election.
in these cases the king is considered to be the leader of the country, but must always take the decisions that the head of government advises them to make.
this is true in the united states.
however sometimes there is a head of government as well as a president.
the president then acts very much like a king or queen, leaving the real decisions to the head of government.
this means that he was the leader of russia.
a disease can be caused by many things.
diseases are more common in older people.
some diseases can be helped with medicine.
some disease is helped by surgery.
people who usually treat disease are called doctors or physicians.
some diseases that are common or very bad are tested for even in people who are healthy.
"if these diseases are found early they can be treated before they cause problems."
if it is found later it usually causes death.
it was first made in old stars.
the corners are all right angles.
it is visited by many tourists.
in recent years the square has become a gathering place for celebrations.
an official language is a language that has special status in a country.
usually the government does its business in the official language.
other countries may not have an official language.
there are many kinds of cakes.
the fat should not be a liquid or a solid at room temperature; it should feel like playdough.
it usually has a lot of cream.
it is like a pie or tart.
a house is a building that is made for people to live in.
it is not a place to live that can be easily packed up and carried away like a tent, or moved like a caravan.
if people live in the same house for more than a short stay, then they call it their "home".
they also come in many different shapes, and may have just one level or several different levels.
a house is sometimes joined to other houses at the sides to make "row houses", but it is not part of a big building with lots of levels.
one of the differences between a house and an apartment is that a house has a front door to the outside world, whereas the main door of an apartment usually opens onto a passage or landing that can be used by other people in the building.
houses have a roof to keep off the rain and sun, and walls to keep out the wind and cold.
most modern houses have special areas or rooms for a person, or a family group to do the things that they need to live comfortably.
many houses have a separate dining room for eating meals and a separate laundry where the clothes are washed.
most families would like to own their own house.
in many other countries, including most of europe, owning a house like this is something that only the richer families can afford, and is just a dream for most people.
in many very poor countries, a lot of people live crowded in houses with only one room.
in many cities there are thousands of small houses crowded together with narrow alleys between them.
a small house is often called a cottage.
they are nearly always built from material that can be found nearby.
a semi-detached house is a building that has two houses side by side and covered over by just one big roof.
many cities and towns have thousands of row houses because they were a good way to build lots of houses close together.
many row houses have two rooms downstairs and two rooms upstairs, with a kitchen or wash area out the back.
some cities have large beautiful rowhouses like the royal crescent which was built 200 years ago at bath in england and is a famous example of georgian architecture.
in some places, the word "bungalow" is used for any house that is all on one level.
the word came from india and for a long time was used for a house that is built all on one level and has a veranda where people can sit or work outdoors, but under a shady roof.
many farm houses are long and have two doors.
one door leads to the rooms used by the family.
sometimes a mansion does not belong to a private family, but to a town council, to a big business company, to a church or college and is a place for a person with an important job to live and to entertain guests.
mansions often need servants to help keep them in order and there are often special rooms where the servants do particular jobs such as cleaning the silver tableware.
a palace is a house that is very grand.
palaces are some of the most famous and beautiful houses in the world.
they have often been built by people who were extremely rich, and who wanted to leave behind them a sign that their family was important.
some palaces have taken a long time to build.
they have been changed and added to by different family members or changed by people from different families that have owned them over many hundreds of years.
the largest palace in the world is the louvre which was built in paris for the kings of france.
houses are usually built from types of material that can easily be made or bought near the place where the house is built.
because of this, old houses in different towns and different villages look quite different to each other, even in the same country.
in modern times building materials can be transported easily and this means that a builder has much more choice about the types of material to use for a house.
in many parts of the world, mud or clay are the main building materials.
clay is a type of soil that sticks together more strongly than most other types of soil.
there are three main ways of building walls with mud and clay.
in places where there is lots of stone, many houses are built of it.
a trader is a person who tries to make a profit by buying something at a low price and then selling it at a higher price.
usually this does not work so the trader has to trade it to someone who cannot reach the person who sells the thing at a cheaper price.
a sailor is a person who works under a captain to sail a ship.
a farmer is a person who grows crops and raises animals to be used as food.
this has been a common job for people since the beginning of civilization.
however, most people do not think that it is in the zodiac.
sometimes a river receives a lot of extra water.
the process of leaving your home behind in search of a safe place is called "evacuation".
hell is the place where the souls of dead people go after their lives end, if they have done evil things in life.
in christianity, hell is the place where the souls of people go who did not accept jesus christ as their lord and savior or blasphemed the holy spirit of god.
in being cast out, he was removed from the presence of god.
it does not yet work in all of bulgaria, which is a new member of the eu.
a government-in-exile is a group of people who claim they are the real government of a country, but who live in another country or area.
these were common during world war ii.
it is made of earth and stones standing in circles.
no one knows who built it or why they built it.
it is made out of a hard stone called "sarsen".
they also show the time of the solstice.
dead people were buried there so it was a kind of cemetery.
some people claim that it has magic powers.
it is good for making solid walls.
it is also good for polishing, because it can have a shiny surface which shows the pattern of its crystals.
because they air at this time, they are sometimes called daytime serials'".
today, very few members of either family are still on the show.
these two men hate each other very much and would like to see the other fail.
this hatred is the root of much of the story on the show.
he travels most of the year talking to people about a beautiful feeling they can feel within themselves.
some of his students are in their late teens, and others have been his students for more than thirty-five years.
he should have lived a life of private lecturer for a long time.
he was eager to learn the nature of human experience: how humans could know something, and what their knowledge was based on.
hume had tried to make clear what our experience had been, and had reached a very strong opinion called "skepticism", that there was nothing to make our experience sure.
there are no physical objects, but the limitations of our mind that work whenever we feel something through our senses.
it was his main work of ethics.
an aunt is either a sister of one of someone's parents or the wife of their uncle.
not much is known about him, or even if he was a real person.
some people think it was really a group of people who made those poems.
once he had grown up, he had troubles with the authorities several times.
he spent quite a few years in prison.
he later escaped the death penalty by moving to italy.
the death penalty against him was later changed to a prison sentence.
he also started to write down his ideas.
he tried to hide his writing, and also wrote in a very small print, so that the consumption of paper would not be noticed.
there are 15 members in the eurozone
if the person then starts counting the shirts from the left, he would first see the red shirt.
so the red shirt is the first tee-shirt.
the blue shirt is the second tee-shirt.
they result from the fact that the person has many objects, and they give them an order (hence 'ordinal').
this means that people can choose leaders to represent them and make the laws.
what makes a a republic different is that the people do not need the permission of a king or other higher power to choose leaders and the type of government they want.
at that time, the catholic church was saying that they were allowed to decide who could go to heaven after death, and they were selling indulgences for money to tell them they could go to heaven.
if that was true, it would mean that poor people would not be able to go to heaven, but that the priests in the church would be rich from selling these things.
this means the idea that only faith can bring humans to the salvation that god gives from his mercy.
so the people went to mass, and they did not understand what the priest said.
that way they were no longer depending on the priest to tell them what was in the bible, but could read it themselves.
another idea that became popular around this time was the idea of free trade.
most of the rich countries in the world today are liberal democracies with more or less free trade.
in order for achilles to catch the tortoise, he must of course cover some distance a between where he began the race and where the reptilian racer began as well.
instead, it adds up a large group of numbers all at once.
that is, it is not always necessary that for a point a and a point b, one must go halfway between them before getting to point b.
the plant has been used in witchcraft for a long time.
the serbian language is used in many of the countries around it.
cancerous cells are often quite weak but since the cancer is actually a part of the body, the body will not attack it even though often it could easily kill it.
there is a special piece of glass in front of the hole called a lens.
normally the time taken for the shutter to open and close is much less than 1 second.
the aperture ring is a flat circle with a small hole in the centre.
the small hole is called the "aperture".
when the aperture is very small only a small amount of light can enter the camera.
this is called a slow film.
this means the shutter has to stay open for a long time.
a chemical reaction happens in the paper, which turns the areas hit with light black when the paper is 'developed'.
three other things are important when taking a photograph.
a good picture is not too bright and not too dark.
it is one of the great lakes.
the leader of the government is called the "premier".
most of the people in ontario live in the south, and that is where the big cities are.
the cities in the north are smaller.
in the far north of ontario hardly any people live at all, and there are no roads or railways.
in the summer, it can get very hot in the south parts.
the leader of the government, who is called the "premier", is the leader of the largest party in the legislature.
head of government
the head of government of a country is the person who runs it.
this is not always the same person as the head of state.
for example in the united states the president is both the head of state and the head of government.
not all the land is flat prairie.
classical music has a strong relationship with the church - it is true to say that all classical music can trace its roots back either to the need to dance and celebrate or the need to praise god.
much of the city was destroyed.
a picture of the bird is on the city seal.
during riots in 1906, at least 12 people died and more than 70 other people were hurt.
he was found guilty, but then the government decided not to execute him because not everyone was convinced he had done it.
this upset people who thought he had killed the girl, and there were more riots in 1915 and frank was lynched (hanged with a rope until he died).
many people did not have jobs and were hungry.
the city government was almost out of money and the coca-cola company gave the city some money to help.
there are more private boats registered in michigan than in any other state.
many famous people have come from michigan.
they live in soil and feed on bacteria.
a male can only make sperm.
it is part of greater manchester.
people from all the world come to climb in those mountains.
the head of state is queen elizabeth ii.
because of this there are many plants and animals that only live in new zealand.
the war finally ended in 1953, but there was never any real peace treaty.
more decreases are planned in the future as the us hands over more and more of the security responsibility for defending the south to the military of the rok.
he is also head of state.
he also chooses who will be in the cabinet.
there are also many small parties.
the grand national party is considered right of center while the woori party is considered far left.
the other sixth is called northern ireland, the part which is still part of the united kingdom.
most irish people wanted to rule themselves but the british government kept most of the power in london.
at first there was not a lot of support for the "easter rising", but there was a lot more support after the executions.
people all across the nation cried for him.
but the vietnamese government lied and said that he had died the next day.
he has been accused of doping but the only positive test he has given was for a drug he was later given official permission to use.
it takes eighteen months for phoebe to go all the way around saturn.
it is half made out of rock, and half made out of ice.
the ground on phoebe is black, which means that it is very dark when seen from earth.
phoebe does not have any air, and there is no water on its surface.
because there is no air or water, there are no people living there.
the three mountains are the highest of each of the three countries in the island of great britain.
they do it simply because they enjoy walking in the mountains and they want to try something difficult.
these people usually do it in small groups.
some of them will do the walking, and others will do the driving and the cooking for them.
reasons why some people do not like the challenge.
people who live near the mountains often do not like having cars around in the middle of the night.
most attempts are made in the summer, because the days are long and the weather is good.
in the winter it is dark for most of the day and can be very cold.
in the summer it is still light in britain at this time.
it is important to be quick at the bottom of the mountains.
there is not much time so food is usually prepared by others waiting at the bottom.
when the climbers arrive they usually leave straight away and eat while they are on the road.
this is why it is done at night, when it is too dark to climb.
in the summer it is light by this time.
if it is climbed quickly enough and the walkers do not get lost they can return to the bottom by about nine o'clock.
the walkers are usually very tired and worried that there is not enough time.
if they arrive at the bottom of snowdon at half past one in the afternoon they can climb it in two hours.
this leaves them an hour and a half to get back to the bottom.
if they were too slow on the other mountains or the journeys in between they might have to run!
you need to be quite fit to do the challenge in 24 hours, but people who are young and active, and people who are used to hillwalking, can do it.
if the weather is bad or the drivers are slow it is very difficult.
the fort grew into a city which is now called pittsburgh.
this was the start of the oil industry in the united states.
it also caused many of its cities and towns to decay.
the years right after that had many
he is the leader of the cabinet.
the province is the top unit.
a custom is more about practices, while culture is more about ideas or a group of customs.
almost 10% of all of the people in the state live in chennai.
the city is the fourth largest city of india.
the city is separated into three parts by two rivers.
the 350 year old city still has much of its old charm.
the city was called for much of the last four hundred years.
the name of the city was changed to mumbai by an act of the parliament in 1997.
as a result, the city has grown far into the mainland both to the north and the east.
akbar was very eager to learn about other religions and faiths and even though he could not read he loved to have people reading to him.
it has a very old history.
it is in the north of india.
he also climbed ten other mountains after mount everest, all of which are also located in the himalayas.
he finished primary school two years early, but he did not do very well at high school.
at first, he was smaller than other students there and very shy so he felt safe with his books and often thought of a life filled with adventure.
every day, he rode a train to and from high school, and he often used this time to read.
learning how to box helped him become more confident.
at age 16 his interest in climbing started during a school trip to mount ruapehu.
although very tall at 6 ft 5 in (195cm), he found that he was stronger than many of his fellow hikers.
historians think that he did not talk about his theory because he was afraid that people would not like his theory if it showed questions about religion.
he decides that if every person does what is best for himself and his little circle of family and friends, then the country will do better.
this is because every person knows a lot about his own situation (what he needs, what he wants, what works and what does not work), much more than the government knows.
he was also a philosopher who wanted to know why people thought (felt) that some things are good and others bad.
after a few years, his mother
called him back to his home and asked him to do farming.
but, his teacher begged for isaac to come
his father had died three months before his birth.
the first law states that an object that is not being pushed or pulled by some force will stay still, or will keep moving in a straight line at a steady speed.
it is harder to understand that an object will continue to move without help.
the second law explains how a force acts on an object.
if the floor pushed back with less force, the person lifting the box would fall through the floor.
if it pushed back with more force the lifter would fly into the air.
when most people think of isaac newton, they think of him sitting under an apple tree watching an apple fall to the ground.
isaac calculated the force needed to keep the moon moving around the earth.
then he compared it with the force that made the apple fall downward.
after allowing for the fact that the moon is much farther from the earth, and has a much greater mass, he discovered that the forces were the same.
no one had been able to explain why the planets stayed in their orbits.
less than 50 years before isaac newton was born it was thought that the planets were held in place by an invisible shield.
isaac proved that they were held in place by the sun’s gravity.
what he did was to explain how it worked.
his mother was only 18 when he was born.
when he was a young boy he started to write stories and plays for his friends.
during this time he wrote some beautiful letters which showed his promise as a writer.
he soon joined other young men who wanted to change the way that german writers were writing.
they also liked human nature: by this they meant people who had not been spoiled by civilization but were close to the country in their hearts.
during this early period of his life he was in love with a girl called friederike brion whose father was a pastor.
he felt terribly sad when they split up and the feeling of desertion by a lover comes into a lot of goethe’s works.
they are all based on his own experience.
he spent most of his life working at it.
faust uses magic in the hope that it will tell him everything about life.
as well as his writing he was developing his career in law.
here he made new friends, including a young girl who was already engaged to someone else.
the heroes of his books at this time were often ordinary people instead of geniuses.
after a time he realized that all his work on governmental duties were not giving him time for his writing, so he went to italy for 18 months.
he visited italy a second time.
the two men talked about many of their ideas and helped one another by offering criticism of their works.
it means a novel which shows a person growing up and developing his character and learning about the world.
he made changes to the original version, putting all the small bits together into one great play.
some of his scientific ideas are used in the story as he talks about the way that two chemical compounds can break up and form new unions.
he chose the title to show that he was telling us the truth about his life, but that he had changed the order of some events to make it into a poetic book.
at the end of his life he finished a second part of "faust".
he was an influence for plato.
he was said to have had a good childhood.
his followers did not have any personal possessions, and they were all vegetarians.
some say he was the first person to use the term philosophy.
since he worked very closely with his group, the pythagoreans, it is sometimes hard to tell his works from those of his followers.
religion was important to the pythagoreans.
they believed that these souls were in both animal and plant life.
he also told of hearing the voice of a dead friend in the howl of a dog being beaten, and was then attacked by an angry mob.
he lived in the greek city of athens.
he is perhaps most important because he started trying to find out how people thought.
in his time, this was a new way of finding important facts, and we think that socrates was the first to do this.
this is because the things that he said made people think that he was very wise, and because of the importance and success of the people that he taught, like plato, a younger philosopher.
not much is truly known about the life of socrates.
he lived such a long time ago that we do not have much real information about him.
we have some important stories from a few people who lived at the same time.
socrates may have said that his mother's example made him help young people to give birth to new thoughts and ideas.
it was said that she was often very angry with him and was sometimes violent.
this may be true or not true.
it is also said that he fought as a soldier for athens in three wars.
he is said to have been very brave and to have fought well.
he would say what he thought and often said things that people did not want to hear.
he showed that some important people knew nothing.
he was called a gadfly which is a small fly that attacks cattle (the cattle cannot stop the pain and gets angry).
the oracle was well known for saying things that were not very clear.
socrates may have then asked many people in the city about this.
he made many enemies among the people who were important in the city.
as an old man socrates would often talk to young men and boys and try to teach them.
some people were grateful for this and some people hated him for it.
he had a group of young friends who loved him a lot and spent a lot of time with him.
sometimes their parents were very unhappy about this.
he said that people who do bad things do so because they do not know any better.
people think that socrates was a good man because he did no harm, except he asked questions about everything.
however, during his life many people thought he was a bad person, because he asked those questions and because he made young people unhappy about their lives.
this means that one must think about one's own life and its meaning.
some people have said that most humans are happier if they do not think too much about their life.
socrates also taught that many people can look at something and not truly see it.
he asked questions about the meaning of life and goodness.
these are still very important questions.
he had become interested in writing poems.
dante did not pay the money, in part because he believed he was not guilty, and in part because all his needs in florence had been stolen by the black guelphs.
it was during this time that he wrote the first two books of the "divine comedy".
she was born into a famous family.
she had 5 brothers and 1 older sister.
charles did not like working and wished to stop working after his father was released.
his mother said that the family needed the money so charles was forced to continue working.
heat and water were added to the cabins so the trees would survive in cold weather.
he tried for over a month but bad weather and winds stopped the ship.
she had been at sea for ten months.
they did not want to have another long journey and go back to england.
after they arrived they took everything they could from the ship.
the polynesians knew about the island and people had once lived there.
there was a lot of fighting between the new settlers.
most stayed on norfolk, but about 22 people found their way back and their descendants still live on pitcairn.
the "pandora" was able to capture the mutineers left on tahiti, but could find no sign of the group that was hiding on pitcairn.
the following list tells what happened to the crew of the "bounty".
from the 19 left in the small boat, only 12 got back safely to england
take one step, then see its results before taking another
making friends with people you have argued with
giving up some things you want to get those things that are most important to you
people want to have a number choices that are different from each other
meet the needs of changing times
none of them can be forced on anyone.
this was a big change from her parents.
they knew that their hopes of marriage to the king was gone.
they punished her badly for this, even though it was not her fault.
it was obvious that he was going to die soon.
jane's mother decided to give up her claim to be queen for jane.
now jane would be the next in line to the throne if the rights of the princesses mary and elizabeth were ignored.
it is not known if they liked each other, but it was obvious that they wanted to consummate the marriage.
she refused to take the crown.
but she never forgave herself for doing this.
she was then brought into the tower of london.
she wrote many letters and read many books while at the tower of london.
she wrote a letter to queen mary saying that she never wanted the crown.
when jane was told that her head was going to be cut off, she was very scared.
the night before the execution, jane wrote many letters to her family and prepared her neck for the block.
she then knelt by the block and tied a piece of cloth around her eyes.
when the executioner told her to put her head on the block, she reached out but could not find the block since she was very nervous.
she cried for help until someone grabbed her hands and helped her find the block.
jane then put her neck above the block and slowly lowered it onto the block, pressed her neck against the wood and fit her chin in the hold.
then she brought her arms around her.
the executioner then grabbed jane's head by her red hair and lifted it up to show the crowd.
it stands on the bank of the river thames, in the oldest part of the city.
many still live at the tower and are taken care of by the staff who work there.
he wanted her to become his mistress, but at first she refused.
henry now thought that their marriage should not have been allowed in the first place.
he said he was doing what he thought was right, even though he claimed he still loved catherine.
he quoted a verse from the book of leviticus in the bible.
an official from the pope in rome was brought over and a trial was held.
the official stated that he could not come to a conclusion and the case would have to be decided by the pope.
the pope was afraid of what would happen if he allowed the divorce, so he did not make a decision.
if the baby had been born when they were not married, it would not be possible for the child to become the heir to the throne.
he found people who said that anne had been the lover of other men while she was married to king henry.
she was put on trial and found guilty of adultery and incest, although she was probably innocent.
ever since britney was very young she liked to sing, dance and act so she took lessons.
it was a long way from home for a young child, her mother and baby sister from a small town to go but britney's family believed in her.
britney liked her home but really wanted to sing and dance again.
it uses their bodies to get energy.
he is trying to let all the humans know the truth - that they are living inside the matrix.
the girl leads him to a dance club.
he meets the woman who sent him the message.
men in black clothing are coming to attack him and catch him.
she tells him to get into her car.
you can see it when you look out your window or when you turn on your television.
he will not understand the matrix.
it is his name from the time when he was not free.
the man i love is the one.
he knows the truth of the matrix.
it is the fight to free the humans.
i didn't come here to tell you how this is going to end.
humans cannot know what is real.
the chicken meat is false because the person did not kill the chicken.
it feels like something that i've done before
19 terrorists were also killed in the attacks.
many other buildings in the area were damaged badly and had to be destroyed.
the river which runs through the city is the pisuerga.
they can also be taken for rides along the canals in a type of boat called a "gondola".
the buildings in venice are very old and attractive, and tourists come from all over the world to see them and the canals.
this has made venice one of the most famous cities in the world.
the most common is the gondola, and also the vaporetto, which is a water bus and carries lots of people around the canals.
it is an important city for tourists.
most of foods are based on meat.
the whole animal was usually eaten.
people were saying that her and susan lucci did not get along and this caused problems with them working together.
the show was well liked by both the critics and the audience.
since that time, she has said she might do it if the script is good enough.
gellar found out that she needed permission from the government to take the sword out of the country.
gellar has said in interviews that she believes in god but does not belong to an organized religion.
they did not want their daughter to make any movies about sex.
she does not talk to her parents now.
she is also known for having marrying many times.
they had a son in 1996.
they had a son in 1996.
when the tower was built, it was only meant to be kept for 20 years.
people did not like the tower and wanted it taken apart.
by this time, the city had learned that the tower could be used to help with communications.
he was the god of the sky and thunder.
he is known as zeus in greek mythology.
she is one of the twelve olympians.
she is often shown with her helmet on and with her shield, which has medusa's head on it.
this was a present to her from perseus.
in hesiod's "theogony", zeus had sexual intercourse with metis, but was then scared of her having a child because a prophecy had said that a son born to metis would overthrow zeus as he had done to his father.
to try and stop metis having a child, zeus changed her into a fly and then swallowed her.
she was fully grown and had her armor on.
salt lake city is a city in the united states of america.
it is named after the great salt lake, which it is near.
wars at home made trouble between groups and left some people without homes.
the bronze age was not at the same time everywhere, because different groups of people began to use bronze at different times.
while he became king on may 14, 1643, he was only four years old so he had to wait 16 years until he could rule.
he was 21 years old when he started ruling.
he was known as the sun king, because he believed his splendor and power was as bright as the sun.
this treaty said that there would be freedom of religion in france.
the olympic games is a sporting event that takes place in a different city every four years.
it includes many of the best athletes from all over the world.
there are separate games for the summer and winter.
the iron age was a time in history after people began to use iron tools.
in europe, it is a period of prehistory, because iron age people did not write their history down.
the people who learned how to make iron tools were able to make many of them.
they could farm their fields better and grow more crops.
some people invented coins to help buy and sell their crops and their iron tools.
and of course, bronze weapons and armor were no match for those made out of iron, so many peoples who did not have iron were conquered by those who did.
sulfur is a yellow solid that is not a metal.
drawing is a way of making a picture.
fort worth is known for its stockyards, and amarillo is known for the cattle business and stockyards.
they fought for more than 100 years, then they created a new state.
the name for the new state was "brandenburg-prussia".
he had little experience and little imagination, and he made bad plans.
at the end of world war i some people wanted to break prussia into smaller states.
there are several reasons why these texts were not included in the canon.
the texts might only have been known to few people, or they might have been left out because their content does not fit well into that of the other books of the bible.
they do not call them apocrypha.
they call them deuterocanonical, which means that they belong to the second canon.
the first list is of books first written in hebrew.
this second list is of books first written in greek.
that is why early church fathers quoted from bibles including these books.
the translators of the king james bible said that these books were written to prepare the people for jesus, in the same way as john the baptist did.
they said that the apostles used these books.
then soon after christianity became the only religion of roman empire in the 4th century, the romans decided to cut out all of the same books that the sanhedrin had cut out, and they moved some of them to the "apocrypha".
understanding means to realize what people mean when they do or say something.
sodium is so soft that it can be easily cut with a knife.
some games are played with two dice but sometimes one.
weights can be put inside a dice to make it only land on a certain number once it is rolled.
an example of a square matrix is
it is one of the six official languages at the united nations.
it is on the south coast.
he first was a messenger for virginia.
he later led troops against the french.
they did not have any children.
washington led the army until the end of the war in 1783.
he was the only leader of the early united states who decided in his will that his slaves were to be freed once he himself and his wife had passed away.
abraham had 1 brother and 1 sister.
his father refused to own slaves as a religious baptist, although kentucky was then a state where slavery was allowed.
in his childhood he helped his father on the farm, but when he was 22 years old he left his parents and moved to new salem, in illinois, to work as a salesman.
they had four children, but three of them died when they were very young.
when he moved to springfield, he began to work as a lawyer.
he was buried at the foot of hill cemetery.
he later served as the governor of massachusetts.
many people did not like those acts.
he was 46 years old when he was elected.
although he lied that she did not give him oral sex, he was found to have done nothing wrong by the u.s.
reward and punishment
lead them to help and protect each other.
at that time people often come forward to help each other.
it might happen that someone cannot help at that one time - it might also happen that they are not there the next time.
only after a lot of time does it become obvious who is and is not contributing to the safety of the group, or who is avoiding the group when people really need their help.
a mosque, church or temple is almost always a center of a social network, and often that network has a name and an identity of its own that is not that of the religious organization.
a cabal is a group of people who try to control things in a secret way.
a cabal does not mean people who are in power because they are meant to have power.
a cabal means people who have more power than they are meant to have.
with this word he meant that the president had not really the power that he is given by the constitution and that the vice president and the secretary of defense had more influence than they should have.
the word team is used for such groups.
many people give away what they have created and never think about it as property - other people try to control it and get paid every time anyone sees it - or even every time they just talk about it.
often sciences have different names based on whether they study humans or not.
not being able to sell the idea as such is a defeat to the discipline.
they usually stay together in groups called "herds".
the "calves" have long strong legs and can walk a few minutes after they are born, so they can follow the herd.
a male is called a "bull".
a female is called a "cow".
a baby is called a "calf".
two or more babies are "calves".
because many cows will form a herd with one bull, most male cattle are used for meat.
the adjective that is used to describe something that is like a cow or an ox is "bovine".
they are ruminants which means that they have more than one stomach and they digest their food very well.
cattle have very strong tongues and strong lower front teeth that help them to eat grass.
after a cow has eaten and is resting, they return the grass from their stomach to their mouth and grind it with their very large back teeth to get all the nourishment from it.
it means that cattle do not need as much food as horses, even though they are about the same size.
on farms, bulls are usually quieter and can be led by their owners, but they can be aggressive with other bulls and with strangers who might go near the herd.
for this reason, most male cattle are either sent to the butcher while they are still calves or are " castrated" so that they are not likely to fight.
ever since people started using cattle in prehistoric times, cattle have been seen as a sign of wealth.
their flesh can be eaten as meat.
the food that they eat is not expensive.
this keeps the milk supply going.
the milk is also separated to remove most of the cream.
some milk is turned into cheese and some is turned into yogurt.
large dairy herds are usually kept in places where there is a good supply of grass and the fields are quite small.
"steers" are the best for this purpose because they can be kept in herds, without fighting each other.
every part of a beast can be used.
the meat which is not used by humans becomes pet food and everything that is left over becomes garden fertilizer.
the oxen are put into pairs and each pair must work together.
a wooden yoke is put about the neck of each pair, so that the work is shared across their shoulders.
they are not as fast as horses, but they are less often injured.
a friend is a person that someone likes or knows.
people who are friends talk to each other and spend time together.
they also help each other when they are in trouble.
friends are people that can be looked up to and trusted.
a friend is one who admires a person's skill and helps or encourages them to make the right choices.
this means that they like them very much, and have formed a relationship.
if something is called quick, that means it moves at a very fast speed or does not take much time to finish.
thunder is a very loud sound that is made sometimes during a very big rain storm.
thunder is so loud, it can be heard from a very far distance.
thunder is made when lightning strikes.
the energy from the lightning heats up the air so much that it makes a kind of explosion.
when lightning is very near, thunder will be heard soon after the lightning flash, and the sound will be very loud.
people can guess how far away the lightning is by counting the number of seconds between the time they see the lightning and hear the thunder.
it is one of only seven years to use just one roman numeral.
it is one of only seven years to use just one roman numeral.
it is one of only seven years to use just one roman numeral.
the number three is one more than 2 and one less than four.
sometimes people think of three as a special number.
ten is the number that is after nine and before eleven.
most people have ten fingers and ten toes.
ten is an important number because most people write numbers using multiples of ten.
100 is the square of 10 (formula_1)
there are some times we also call a man a "boy".
sometimes people also use the word in a bad way for a black man or male slave.
biology is not the only thing which makes people feel they are men, or that other people are men.
perhaps one in 100,000 people are men who were born without a male body.
some of those intersex people who people said were female (girls) when they were born later want to change this.
a woman is a female human adult.
women give birth to babies and children.
until the middle 1900's woman did not have the right to vote, and were treated with disrespect.
left is the side where your thumb is on the right hand.
middle means the same as "center".
up means the same as "above".
down means the same as "below".
far means that something is a long way away.
the first quakers were christians but the religion today includes some other people who are not christian.
this number is very small compared to other religious groups.
even so, a lot of people have heard of the quakers, because they are good at letting people know what they believe.
this is because they are trying to listen to god.
then they all sit quietly again.
quakers believe that a meeting for worship helps them to understand what god wants.
they also have quiet times, but they do not last as long.
they believe that it is wrong to make an oath or promise.
this is because they think people should tell the truth all the time.
making a promise shows that they are trying to be more truthful than normal.
this is another idea that has caused problems.
governments often want people to promise that they will be loyal to the country.
in a court, people have to promise that they will tell the truth.
several countries now say that quakers do not have to make oaths, but in the past quakers were put in prison for not making oaths.
this means that they have to say out loud what they are going to do.
however, there are some important jobs - such as the people who look after the meeting's money - that quakers prefer to be done by members.
members have decided that they definitely want to be quakers, and have asked their meeting to make them a member, to show that they think that quakerism is right for them.
it can also be described as how big or small something is.
it might also mean that only one part is different.
something following the line is moving in that "direction".
starvation is when a person or animal has not eaten food for such a time that they are unable to do things in a normal way.
after the stomach has been left empty for so long the body starts to give up.
this is the case for humans when they do not eat enough for about 1-2 months.
although it is sold for money, some of the people who cannot buy it download it illegally.
an ant is a small species of insect that lives under the ground in very large groups.
each group is called a "colony".
one ant colony may have thousands of ants.
using scissors made for the wrong hand is very hard for most people.
the name of the color comes from the violet, which is a small flower grown in most parts of the world.
he never married or had children.
not much is known about him.
he put back in place some of the laws of edward the confessor.
the east end is said to be the first building in the gothic style.
many church buildings still remain from this period.
in fact, the architecture had nothing to do with the real goths, a tribe of people who attacked rome in the early middle ages.
england was ruled by a kings whose family also had a lot of land in france.
this caused the towns to grow larger.
because of the peace and wealth of these towns, they showed their pride by building huge town halls, often with very tall towers.
cities often had high walls and many of the houses built at this time were tall, high towers.
the churches of each area had a local ruler who came under the pope.
each bishop had a throne where he could sit when priests and people came to him.
a monastery was a group of buildings where holy men lived and worked and prayed.
he put all the new ideas together in one building.
there was not a clean break between the two styles.
on the other side of the "transept" is the chancel which is often called the choir because that is where the priest and the choir sing the services.
in the arch of the middle door is often an important piece of sculpture, usually "christ in majesty".
on the inside, the "nave" is usually at least twice as high as it is wide, which gives the church a very tall narrow look.
sometimes there is just one tower with a huge spire as at salisbury.
on the inside the arches of the roof rise up like branches.
on the outside, there are often lots of fancy bits along the edge of the roof and on the tops of buttresses and above the windows.
the flying buttresses which arch across the roof of the aisle were used to support the roof above the windows, so the walls did not have to be so thick.
between the narrow buttresses, the walls could be opened up into large windows.
a row of arches that is up high on a building is a gallery.
this is known as blind arcading.
they could make a vault with three sides or five sides quite easily, by using pointed arches.
the vaults were made of ribs which met each other at the highest part of the vault.
but the changes were not the same in every country.
these designs were often used in windows, which look as if they are filled with beautiful stone lace.
they are called the five sisters.
the depressed arch is wide and looks as if it has been pushed almost flat.
the other famous example is bath abbey.
everything about the building was designed to tell a message about god.
carvings near the door often show the signs of the zodiac because the patterns of stars in the sky were very important to farming people who didn't have calendars to tell them when to plant and when to harvest.
above the main door is often a sculpture of jesus on a throne, judging the people of the earth.
many pictures and sculptures are there to remind people to live good lives because they never know what will happen next.
it was good for building because it was soft to cut, but got much harder when the air and rain got on it.
in some parts of europe, there were many tall straight trees that were good for making very large roofs.
many of the trees were used for building ships.
the architects had to think of a new way to make a wide roof from short pieces of timber.
the west window is very large and is never a rose window.
there is nearly always a tower at the middle of the building, which may have a big spire.
sometimes they are so big that it was impossible to finish them until modern times.
the bell tower is hardly ever attached to the building, because italy has quite a few earthquakes.
it is the seat of a bishop.
they are someone who worked hard to make the world a better place.
he is famous for killing a dragon and saving the lives of many people.
he was crucified on a cross that was turned sideways to look like an "x".
he was born in a village in wales or along the west coast of england.
when he was 16 years old he was captured and sold into slavery.
one of the kings of ulster who was the high king of ireland at the time had a beautiful cover made out of gold and gems to preserve the bell.
the style of the letters on the cover were used to make the first typewriters.
there are two cities in somerset.
this means "the land of the summer people", because in the past people could only live on the land in the summer.
people usually say that 2 of these parts (named north somerset and bath and north east somerset) are part of somerset, even though they have their own councils.
the town has many villages near by.
a street is a piece of land, made flat or prepared in another way, so that people can travel on it better.
it gets its name from the famous roman baths which are in the town.
the place showed where the upper class went to go on holiday.
there was also a mint where coins were made between 978 and 1035.
from there it flows to the east.
the river flows along the southern edge of the city of norwich.
in the past, the river had a large amount of boats carrying good to norwich.
the church is known as the "minster".
it is from both of these things that ilminster takes its name.
it was dug in the early 1970s, and it showed many times that people lived there.
when the hill seems to have been an important place for groups of early farmers who moved around.
most things were found from when late bronze age people lived on the hill (around 1200 bc).
there are signs that when the romans came to britain, they killed many people here.
legend says he was killed there by a violent man who cut off his head.
it is next to the sea.
it is 7 miles from bristol.
its council is based in the town of yeovil.
many people think that she was the greatest monarch ever to rule england.
when she was very young, she lost her right to be called a princess, because her mother was found guilty of having lovers and was executed.
mary was much older than elizabeth, but her mother had been divorced by king henry and she was also being treated as if she was not the king's daughter.
elizabeth was taken away from the royal court and was looked after by other people.
she was given a good education.
at the time no one thought this would ever happen, but edward died when he was only fifteen.
mary then became queen, and was called queen mary i of england.
elizabeth pretended to believe the same as mary, but she was not really a catholic.
because of the argument over religion, many people in the country preferred elizabeth to mary and wanted to make her queen.
this law decided that the king was the head of the church in england.
she did not believe that people should be punished for what they believed in, but she was strict about people keeping to the rules of the church.
it is not clear why elizabeth never married.
because elizabeth was a woman, many people believed that she would do whatever her husband told her.
mary's marriage to philip of spain had caused a lot of problems, and elizabeth did not want to make the same mistake in marrying a foreign ruler.
if elizabeth had married a man who was not a prince or king, that might also have caused problems because other people would have been jealous of her husband.
it seems that she fell down stairs, but her body was not found until later.
some people said that her husband had arranged for her to be killed, so that he would be free to marry queen elizabeth.
all this gossip made it impossible for elizabeth to marry him.
when elizabeth found she could not marry the man she loved, she may have decided that she would not marry at all.
this scared parliament, because they did not know who would be the king or queen after her.
they asked elizabeth i to name an heir, but she did not.
some people wanted to force elizabeth off the throne and replace her with mary.
this made mary a danger to elizabeth.
because many scottish people were protestants, they did not like mary and wanted to get rid of her.
elizabeth kept her as a prisoner for many years.
in 1578, elizabeth was told that mary had been plotting to kill her and become queen in her place.
mary was put on trial and found guilty, and elizabeth agreed to put mary to death.
she even agreed to marry one of their princes, but later changed her mind.
after the death of mary stuart, the trouble with spain became serious.
elizabeth did not like king philip of spain, who had been married to her elder sister, and she had helped the netherlands fight against spain for their independence.
he let elizabeth down several times.
elizabeth was very hurt by the way he had behaved, and she was even more upset at having to agree to his execution.
she had no children, so she decide that james vi to be the next king of england.
james vi was the son of mary stuart, but he was a protestant.
these were thought to be great achievements.
she moved to atlanta when she was 2 years old to live with her mother.
when she was 13 years old, she got her first acting job.
a picture of her was used on the cover of "playboy".
"playboy" did not ask her if they could use the picture or tell her they were going to use it.
she has a younger brother named joshua.
alba's father was in the air force and his career caused them to live in many different places.
she took her first acting class at age twelve.
one of these was for nintendo and the other was for j.c.
she said she has been cooking for herself since the age of twelve so she would not become as fat as her family members.
she took "playboy" to court for using a picture of her without her permission.
however, she left the church after four years because she believed that she was being judged by the way she looked.
she has said that she still believes in god even though she is not a member of the church.
maybe that makes me a bad actress.
but i have too much anxiety".
he asked her to marry him on her twentieth birthday but she said no.
she joined the cast during its second season.
god save the queen
when there is a king instead of a queen it becomes god save the king.
the tune for god save the queen was used in many countries as a national anthem.
they can live in cool areas, very hot areas or in thick forests.
lion in arms and other signs.
the lion is the largest member of the felidae family in africa.
lions live in groups that are called prides.
each pride has a home area that is called its territory.
lions live for 25 years in captivity.
they are ready to have young when she is 2-3 years old.
lions do not have a den (home) where they would live for a long time.
its colors are red and yellow.
it is sometimes considered a vowel.
a command that gets the next instruction from memory.
heat is a form of energy.
that is, the amount of heat a thing has can be given a number.
the heat measurement numbers only mean something if there is also a unit of measurement.
it has a nice small old town.
the city has a lot of hills and a deep harbour.
the middle of the city is busier than most small cities and is easy for people to walk around.
they are often solid at room temperature.
sad is a sickness that some people have in the winter.
they feel depressed as the nights become longer and there is less daylight.
in microeconomics, we might watch how a person chooses what to buy at the store, or how many things a company will make.
it has been used for over 2000 years.
the change makes the message hard to read.
how to change it back is a secret.
both the person that sends the message and the one that gets it should know the secret way to change it, but other people should not be able to.
different types of cryptography can be easier or harder to use and can hide the secret better or worse.
using good algorithms like these can make it very hard to read the information that is sent.
people are better at patterns, changing order of words or letters, and using words with different meanings.
the celtic languages still spoken use the latin names, even though none of these languages came from latin.
in other parts of the world wednesday is said to be the third day of the week.
in other parts of the world friday is said to be the fifth day of the week.
some people consider friday to be the last day of the week before the weekend as some people finish work or school before the weekend.
in other parts of the world saturday is said to be the sixth day of the week.
it is also the day of worship for jewish people.
its name comes from the roman god saturn.
when he was to leave heaven forever because izanagi ordered him to, he went to say goodbye to his sister.
when she opened the cave, she saw her wonderful reflection in a mirror uzume had put on a tree, and slowly came out of the cave.
another god tied a magic rope across the entrance.
some organisms are so small that they cannot be seen with the naked eye.
if an object is lifted a certain distance from the surface from the earth, the force experienced is caused by weight and height.
it is bigger than a boat.
sailing ships were used for thousands of years, but they were very important in wars and trade from the 1500's to the 1800's.
transport of people and cargo on sailing ships continued until the 1920's.
it is smaller than a ship.
these boats are usually made of wood.
it may also have its own air force and soldiers.
it also may have special boats that can go underwater, called submarines.
an air force is the country's air arm of the military that fights in the air.
people in the air force are called airmen.
an air force may also have helicopters.
many people also do not want other people to find out what they are doing or what web pages they are looking at.
they also speak it in surinam.
this can be seen in the word "meenemen".
the correct way of doing this is
the stem changes to a written long vowel.
if the "-en" is then added to the stem (for example with wij), the written form becomes short again (but it still will be spoken as a long vowel).
as a population, they are devoted to family and church and bring island dance and song to this corner of arkansas.
today many languages also use the latin alphabet, and it is the most used alphabet.
in the past such writing systems were used by many cultures, but today they are almost only used by languages people speak in asia.
it has a different meaning in different languages.
today a "county" is often something between a larger state and a smaller town or district.
the new government unit was the "département".
this is the same as the word "county".
others want to make some of them into larger regions.
they usually had a town at their centre.
in 1844, a lot of these small places returned to their old counties.
the power of the county government is very different in every state.
most power is in the towns.
the queen is usually the mother of the worker bees.
they do no other work in the hive.
for one year they are an adult dragonfly.
this can cause damage to houses and other buildings, and can also lead to death.
wind can also be caused by the rising of hot air, or the falling of cold air.
a weathervane can also show you where the wind is coming from.
the word comes from "vertabrae", the bones that make up most spines.
when he is too old or not strong enough to win, he loses his position in the group.
the result of this is that the alpha male usually has more opportunity to mate with the available females.
english is the language of choice because it is the first language taught in schools.
the hard times during the world war ii made the people think that the british were not as powerful as before.
it is usually eaten in the morning.
a fast or to fast is when someone stops eating for a long time.
people choose to do it for religious reasons or for health reasons.
fast can also mean moving at a high speed.
a town is usually a place with a lot of houses, but not a city.
as with cities, there is more than one way to say what a town is in different countries.
the number of people who live in a place does not tell us if it is a town or a village.
in many areas of the world, for example india, a big village can have many more people than a small town.
it is also difficult to say if a place is a town because today, some towns are becoming bigger, and in some places people live in a village or near a town and work in the town.
sometimes a place is a city because it got the name "city" by law.
but people often say it is a town because it is small.
in some states, a town is a town if the state says it is.
in other states, for example michigan, the name "town" has no official meaning and people use it for any place with a lot of people.
in many of these towns, town meetings are the main form of government, so citizens can say what happens where they live by direct democracy.
a bag is a kind of container.
a bag is used for carrying things around.
a small bag that can be carried with a single hand is sometimes called a handbag, purse, or pocketbook.
these three men ruled rome and were called the "triumvirate".
this book was written in the latin language, and is an early history book.
he and his army entered rome and took power.
before this time rome had been a republic, that is, it did not have a king but was ruled by men who had permission from the senate.
some romans did not want a king to rule rome.
they were not happy that caesar had so much power.
on the ides of march - meaning the middle of that month - march 15 44 bc, caesar was called to the senate and was killed by a group of people including some senators who had been his good friends before he died.
julius caesar had been liked very much by the people of rome who were now unhappy about the wars and deaths.
octavian became the first roman emperor and took the name caesar augustus.
caesar married three roman women during his life and had one child called julia.
they fell in love and may have had a son named caesarion.
he told a story of how it may have happened, that a man's good friend helped people to kill him.
in old times there used to be a lot of ainu.
struggle that will help him for all his doings.
the court's ruling gave a number of conditions to be considered a
this became more
in the long term, this line of thought showed the
way to better understanding of the vedas.
small regions or groups of people.
they can rightly be said to have affected the greatest wave of change in hindu
which we would now regard as "tantric".
occasions) and the sacred nature of the cow, it is no wonder that most holy cities and areas in india have a ban on selling meat-products and there is a
hindus understand that the one truth may be seen as different to different people.
some group of words are called mantras.
most of them have been written in sanskrit.
he turned out to be a good soldier under the orders of velazquez.
he went to the new world in 1506.
he knew a lot about maya, the owners at this section of land who could speak for hernando.
but also a lot of other people are interested in this act of world literature.
books were written using only the languages latin and greek.
only people who had learned to read those languages could study the bible.
people were now able to read the bible in their own language.
the medlar is a tree and the name of the fruit of this tree.
today people do not grow it very often.
the plant has flowers in may and june.
they are very hard and acidic, and we can only eat them after the cold weather makes them soft.
many countries still have laws against atheism.
this means that atheists have the same rights under the law as everyone else.
he was the first person to write that people got sick for scientific reasons.
his writings are still important to doctors today.
he said many ideas that doctors still study.
this means that doctors cannot tell anyone else what their patients tell them.
another idea is that the doctor cannot do anything to kill a patient.
this means they say they will do what is said in the "hippocratic oath".
this means that some things are changed.
but the important ideas are the same.
incommensurability is the idea that it is possible to see the world in multiple ways, and that there is not a fair method to see which way is right.
this idea has been defended by thomas kuhn.
he wrote that it is important to remember this, because it means that it is possible to say things that are not scientific, but also not wrong.
harvest means to collect what has been planted and grown in the ground.
this is also called picking crops.
tenochtitlan was one of the greatest cities of the world in that time.
sometimes the aztecs killed humans because they wanted to please their gods.
the aztecs ate a lot of plants and vegetables that could be grown easily in the mexico area.
the main food that they ate was corn, which they called maize.
another food that they ate was squash.
he was born and raised as a quaker.
as the vice president, he was very busy and traveled across the world to places like south america.
he was buried at the library.
he was from the state of michigan but he lived his later years in california where he died.
all of them had also run for president already or were planning to run soon.
once he became president, he realized he could do a good job and decided to run for a full term in 1976.
the object of white blood cells are to stop a person from getting sick.
they follow each other like a train.
someone who writes music may be called the author of that piece of music, though we would usually call that person a composer.
when he was still alive, people thought of him as a historian.
in his books on philosophy, hume said that many of our beliefs do not come from reason.
for example, reason does not tell us that one thing causes another.
similarly, reason does not tell us that someone is a good person.
he was not a religious person and religious people didn't like his opinions.
in 1776, when he was dying, he was very nice to his friends and very calm about death.
a less common name for a bath is a "washtub".
this is where the town name bath comes from.
this shows how wide the head is.
it is made of lots of sugars.
plants use it to keep energy.
it can also be used for thickening cold foods when they are pre-cooked.
he tried to show that the best kind of government has one leader with total power.
he started by looking at human nature.
he said that humans are very selfish and that we are willing to hurt each other if we think it will help us.
he also said that, naturally, humans are all equal because we are all strong enough to kill each other -- even a child can kill a strong man while he sleeps.
then he imagined what things would be like without a government.
some people would fight each other, and everyone else would be very worried about their own safety.
no one would be able to trust anyone else or make plans for the future.
everyone should agree to obey the leader, and give him all their power.
then the leader is supposed to make laws to keep things safe.
this is because everyone already agreed to obey him no matter what.
but many people disagreed with his argument.
some said that hobbes was in favor of rebellion, because he said that people were naturally equal.
the 2003 count of people by the government said that there were 7800 people living in the "comune": about half of the people live in the town and the other people live in the country near town.
we do not know the history of trevi in very old times, although some walls in the center part of the town on the hill are as old as the 1st century bc.
in old times people say that trevi ruled the valley below it, all the way to the colli martani, the line of mountains that run down the middle of umbria.
some of the stone in these churches is old roman and derives from buildings long gone.
books to learn more about trevi.
if they do this, the government can help stop a different company or group from using the same logo, so that everyone can be sure that the logo is only used by the people who used it first.
a picture is a group of colored points on a flat surface that looks the same as something else.
for example, a picture can look the same as an object or a person.
another word for picture is "image".
a lens can make an image of an object appear somewhere else.
sometimes pictures made with pencil or pen are called 'sketches', if they are made very fast and only look a little bit like the real thing.
if people take a lot of pictures, and show them one at a time, very fast, they can make a picture look like the picture are moving.
a television shows people a picture by using light shined on a glass screen.
a projector shines light from a light bulb through a kind of picture that the eyes can see through.
when light shines through this kind of picture onto a wall or another flat place, the picture can be seen on that flat place.
some people can make pictures that do not look flat by taking two regular flat pictures at the same time.
people have to move their eyes in a special way so that they can see both pictures together.
by putting a window in a wall, with or without glass, we let light inside the building.
we leave a hole somewhere big enough to go in and out, with a door which can be opened and closed.
often the door will have a lock, so the building can be left secure.
if a building is to last for a long time, it must have a foundation.
if the ground is soft, the foundation must be very deep and strong.
if a building is high enough, it can have more than one floor.
people can climb from one floor to the next by a staircase, or perhaps by a lift or elevator.
buildings can also have a floor under the ground.
so we build shelters: places to live and to raise our young.
we also build places to work and to make things, places to store things, places to sell things, places where sick people can go to be treated, places to put people who break our laws.
we build churches where a large number of people can gather to worship god or listen to what other people have to say.
they are designed to make us feel small and to make those who own them appear big.
there have been many good architects and also many bad ones, just as there have been good builders and bad.
look at the building where you are reading this.
do some rooms make you feel like staying in them, while others make you want to hurry away?
think about how you could have made the building better.
if someone puts the string on fire, the flame will burn slowly and for a long time.
it can still burn people and things.
if the fire spreads, it can grow into a very big fire and even burn down a house or building.
the fire on a candle can be put out by blowing air on it.
stopping the fire stops the candle from burning until it is all gone.
candles are expensive and the amount of light that they give is small.
they also drink water through their skin.
newts live in warm countries and in water most of the time.
they go back in the water to have babies (larvae).
they then stay in water for the rest of their lives.
a poison which is produced by an animal is called venom.
they can be made by people and by plants or animal's bodies.
they have four legs and are born from eggs.
they live in the water as babies, and can go on land when they grow up.
frogs cannot survive in salt water.
grown frogs can jump far with their legs.
they have long tongues that they use to catch bugs.
they make a sound called a croak.
they sometimes live in trees and sometimes have poison.
frogs live all over the world.
what it is made of depends on how the atoms are joined together.
sometimes when a person mixes together two different liquids, they can turn into a different liquid that is not anything like the ones he or she started with.
chemists are people who find new ways to mix liquids and other things together in order to make new liquids that do new things.
most of the time the word 'chemical' is only used to talk about liquids that can hurt people, or things that people have to be careful when they use them.
a lot of chemicals are used by people every day, even though a lot of people are afraid of chemicals.
some chemicals are not safe at all, but those are not used by normal people every day.
those people should do special things to make sure they are safe, and sometimes they have to wear special clothes that stop the chemicals from hurting their body.
it is also used for making fires and heating.
wood is very easy to cut, but it is also very strong.
after a tree falls, the wood in it can be cut into long, straight pieces called lumber.
wood comes in many different kinds.
sometimes the walls are made of more wood.
when the outside of a house or building is covered in wood, the wooden pieces are usually flat and stacked.
wood is also sometimes used in other parts of the house, like doors and staircases.
wood is also used to make fences.
people use it for drawing on hard things, because it is soft.
tailors use it to draw on material when they are making clothes.
people in the military say a chalk is when an aeroplane is carrying a special load, especially a group of soldiers in a single aeroplane.
they say that the more pleasure people have, and the less pain they have, the happier they are.
other utilitarians say that happiness is not a matter of pleasure and pain, but instead a matter of getting what they want.
if lots of their desires are satisfied, and only a few of their desires are unsatisfied, then they are happy.
animals can be happy or unhappy, and so utilitarians think that animals and humans are both morally important.
they say that it's wrong to hurt animals and make them unhappy, and that we should try to make animals happier by treating them well.
many utilitarians do not eat meat because they are concerned about the harm done to animals.
but there is also a lot of disagreement.
but common sense morality says that they should never hurt someone, even if they think it will be worth it.
the poor people need the money a lot more than they need to see a movie.
so, since utilitarianism says that they should make as much happiness as they can, they should send the money to the poor people instead of going to the movies.
they should "always" send any extra money they have to help poor people.
it is usually larger than a hamlet and smaller than a town or city.
moving to towns is called urbanization.
there have been many sorts of villages and ways of village life.
they grew food on the land by the village.
the difference between a village and a town is that the town has a market.
there are a lot of villages which people say are the biggest village in england.
but this is not so in all the united states.
in many states, there are villages which are bigger than the smallest cities in the state.
the difference is not the population, it is how much power the different sorts of places have, and what they do for people living there.
some villages are in two counties.
the number of people in and around the town is 156,000 (2001); about one third of that number live in the town.
the romans also lived in chelmsford.
then it went over today's north sea and went into the rhine.
it is an old form of the english language that was spoken by people who came to england from what is now germany and denmark.
he was in charge of the army at this time.
he had to leave russia because of stalin, who was now his own enemy and he wanted to harm trotsky.
it is sometimes called "devonshire" although this is not its correct name.
it is in the southwest of the country.
their base was in the city of exeter.
from place names and church dedications it seems that the british did not go far and later came back into exeter because an area in the city was called "britayne" until recently.
an epidemic of foot and mouth disease in 2001 led to many farmers losing their cattle, so they lost a lot of money.
some things are the job of the county council and others are the job of the district council.
it came from the greek alphabet.
it was first used to write latin.
many languages are written with it today.
it is also called the latin alphabet.
there are also some plants that eat insects.
it is not alive; a horse can bring a person from place to place, but it is not a vehicle.
there are many farms close to edmonton.
the city is also well known for its festivals.
it does not need any other countries or regions helping.
it is possible for a well-tended bonsai to live to be older than a large tree of the same species.
after the army he decided to go to politics.
in 2004, he surprised many people when he said that israel will get out of the gaza strip, which is the place where many palestine people live.
syria is a country in the middle east, the west part of asia.
he is also head of state.
syria has a very long history.
it was a land of phoenicians.
later it became a part of the roman empire and then the east roman empire.
the city antioche was great and one of the important cities in the world of christianity.
because behavior is difficult to study as a whole, psychologists often only look at small parts of it at a time.
psychologists use a lot of different tools as part of their daily work and to carry out their experiments.
to call himself or herself a psychologist.
to the east is the state of mississippi.
the largest city is new orleans.
from 1758, he began to live in kyoto, and he stayed there for rest of his life.
he got married when he was 45 years old, and became a father of his daughter kuno (くの).
gold and silver chopsticks are very heavy and cost a lot of money.
this discovery may mean there was some form of trade between the middle east and asia in early antiquity.
also, it is either greedy people who cannot wait for their supper invented the chopstick to get their food or it is confucius who said people should not take knives onto the table.
the sticks are held together in the same hand.
usually this is the right hand.
with proficiency, hold the sticks at the upper ends for a farther reach and a more mature look.
hold the chopstick at different angles if necessary in order to feel comfortable with two sticks between your fingers.
after burning the dead, family and friends use chopsticks to move the burned bones of the dead from the coffin to a pot.
using a set of chopsticks only once, and then throwing them away causes problems for the environment.
this is more common in older people.
using a telephone, two people who are in different places can talk.
this was five years earlier than bell.
his wife was sick and had to stay in bed.
in most countries there are public telephones.
all of these games are similar.
they take turns moving their pieces.
earthquakes are more common in other parts of japan, but not in kansai so this earthquake was a surprise for everyone.
but his plan failed and kobe stayed a small village during a long time.
it is the part of the city where the richest and most important people live.
in the north of vie, at the top of the hills, there are also farms that grow grapes for making wine.
there is a bus service that serves the three hospitals in the region, and the houses among them.
it has this name because there are many water lilies in the area.
only one of the synagogues is still being used.
he developed the idea of system in which each worker has the duty to do one small part of the process of making something.
when people first began to think about orbits, they thought that all orbits had to be perfect circles, and they thought that the circle was a "perfect" shape.
a funeral ceremony can be held in the house of the dead, a church, a temple or a public place.
if it is a religious ceremony, they say a prayer for the dead so that his or her soul may rest in peace.
there is a rumor that some people have bells over the grave so if they get buried alive they can ring it and they will get dug up.
sometimes at funerals the deads family or friends want to pray or say something nice about who died.
it is a common practice for friends and family members to get up and speak about the deceased and tell about fond memories.it is not uncommon at funerals for the minister to ask people in the audience to come up and speak if they so wish.
it was strong and had many defences.
they were now fighting for the germans so that they did not have to stay in camps for prisoners.
some parts of the island stayed under german control and the georgian soldiers could not capture them.
more germans were able to come to the island to help defeat the georgians.
stalin said that because the soldiers had been captured by the germans, they had not fought until they died, so they were traitors.
they are very hard to find because they are so small, they almost do not interact with regular matter (example: they are able to pass through the whole mass of the earth without touching any other particle).
until recently, it was believed that they have no mass but a few years ago it was found out that they have a very small mass, much lighter than electrons.
they are also named "ghost-particles", because they are very hard to detect.
its all about how the writer or director presents ideas in a very different point of view.
sometimes a phrasal verb can have a meaning that is very different to the meaning of at least one of those two or three words separately.
a season is a part of the year.
this is because the rain changes more than the temperature.
the date at which each season begins is different in different countries.
the equinox is the time when the day and the night are the same number of hours.
it was built on a roman site.
an attempt to escape failed when he got stuck in the bars.
the story of atlantis first appears in the stories timaeus and critias by the greek philosopher plato.
by studying the types of rock that are found in the bottom of the atlantic ocean, scientists are sure that there was never really any large island or small continent there, so many people today think that plato may have heard a story about another place and moved it to the atlantic ocean in his book.
the word which explains how they compare is called the comparative.
they can also compare actions using adverbs.
many words can be made into a comparative by adding "er" to the end of the word.
some words cannot be made into a comparative by adding 'er' instead we use the word more in front.
usually each letter makes a sound ("phoneme") and a group of letters makes the block of sound (syllable).
all words are made from at least one syllable.
there are many more words that have two or more syllables.
an umbrella is a hand tool that is used to stop rain from falling on a person.
it is also used to make shade and protect people from sunlight.
you may have to seek out your own commercial service because many providers have their own alternative.
it is common in places like africa.
he promised him his daughter as his wife if he returned (which iztaccíhuatl's father thought he would not).
the gods covered them with snow and changed them into mountains.
in december 2000, tens of thousands of people were made to leave the area by the government based on the warnings of scientists.
the most ships pass through it.
but the spread of the naming could also be from the view of the cities of the hanseatic league.
the area is very famous for fishing.
with some storms there are even waves breaking there.
in the last ice age the north sea was covered by large areas of ice called glaciers.
people have been fishing in the north sea for thousands of years.
however, so many fish are now caught there that new ones may not be able to grow fast enough to keep the fishery going.
most other countries use the din paper sizes.
in this alphabet there are often two different letters for a sound.
napoleon was able to spend much of the next eight years in corsica.
he led troops in italy and he began to gain fame and power.
some believe that napoleon should not have left his soldiers in egypt.
they defeated many russian cities and villages, but by the time they reached moscow it was winter and his army did not have enough food.
only 10,000 soldiers were able to fight at the end of the retreat.
his former troops joined him and he again became ruler of france for a length of 100 days.
and also they had to wear a yellow star, to show that they were jews.
he wanted to protect his family.
he spoke to some of the people who worked in his business.
one of them was a young woman of about 22 years old, and was named miep gies.
otto frank needed help - he was going to turn the top floor of his business into a secret hiding place for himself and his family called "the secret annex".
they hid in their secret hiding place for two whole years, without being discovered by the nazis.
they planned to stay there until the end of the war.
they spent around two years in their hiding place, never able to go out into the sunshine.
during the day, they had to be very quiet, because the business continued downstairs, and not all the workers knew that the frank family was in hiding in the upper part of the building.
she called her diary, "kitty" and wrote in it about all the things that were happening to her and to her family.
she wrote about all the things that young girls think about - how she was getting along with her friends and parents, boys, life,her emotions.
she hoped to write a book that everyone would read.
no one knows exactly what happened, but after about two and a half years in hiding, not long before the end of the war, an unknown person told the nazis that a jewish family - the franks - were in hiding.
she wanted to keep it safe until after the war.
he hoped that his family had survived too - but they hadn't.
his wife was killed at auschwitz.
now, people would be able to read her book, and they would also learn about the difficult time that the jews had during the war, and about the wonderful people who helped them.
it has been printed in over 20 languages, and people across the world have read and enjoyed this true story.
a country that is known for its tolerance in the law is the netherlands.
he was the first leader of the netherlands.
it is not sure how he got this name.
the king of spain offered a reward for the person who would kill william.
the two sides next to the right angle are called the "legs" and the other side is called the "hypotenuse".
this can also be shown as formula_4
this is because the cold thing has more heat capacity and so takes more heat to make it hot.
unless some work is done, heat moves only from hot things to cold things.
wherever he is seen, it means such a system can work with linux.
the reason for giving the book away for free was because in part, the book was propaganda, and giving it away free was a way of trying to recruit members.
these are often used as part of what the user sees when she uses a computer program.
the cape of good hope is a place near the far south end of africa.
it is a well known area for ships that pass to the east in the sea between southern africa and antarctica.
it is in the country of south africa.
hand washing stops much new disease.
rub all parts of the hands again and again.
then rub hands under running water again and again to take off all soap.
dry hands using a clean cloth or paper.
use moisturizing lotion so hands do not dry if the hands are being washed many times every day.
use more than enough soap and water and rub each part of the hands again and again.
use more water to take off the soap and dry hands paper towel.
be strong and serious about the washing.
use running water again and again to take off all soap.
keep hands up so water does not go from arms to hands.
unfortunately, he ended up never having the use of his legs again.
that country was divided by three countries in 1830.
many people think that it is a very hot country because it is tropical.
colombia has many regions and some of the regions are cold because there are a lot of mountains (the andes).
colombia also has some of the most beautiful cities in the world.
many foreigners come to the country to get health services.
he did not want to make business of it, but to help the poor people.
but they have many other groups.
the most famous were the muiscas.
the spaniards heard about and the people told them that there was a great golden city somewhere.
since then they started to look for el dorado.
he was told to search for new holland.
it is about making computers' decision making and train of thought appear more human.
it is to build a machine that can act as if it were smart.
every programming language has rules about what it can and cannot do.
many programming languages have one special philosophy that tells the people who made the language how to make it all work together.
the basic language is said to be easier to read than other languages.
tea is a hot or cold drink that is popular in the united kingdom and united states.
to make black tea workers take the leaves and spread them out on shelves where they can dry.
next they are rolled and broken into pieces and put into a room where they absorb oxygen.
finally the leaves are dried with hot air until they turn brown or black.
green tea is made by putting freshly picked leaves into a steamer.
it was made by a group of people that worked on it for more than 20 years, and they finished and published the first dictionary in 1951.
they chose the name interlingua because they wanted it to be used for people of different countries to talk to each other easily.
because interlingua was made by people to be easy, it is easier than other languages to learn.
those two were made before interlingua.
the earth is the only planet that we know of that has life.
the changes in calendar over the years make it hard to say exactly when the greek actor thespis became the first person to speak words as a character in a play at the "theatre dionysus".
this was a big change in storytelling.
voice actors are the people who make the voices for the characters.
it is used a lot because it is very strong and cheap.
iron is the main thing used to make steel.
as iron is magnetic, it can be used to make a magnet.
iron is one of the most important metals on the earth because it can be used for a lot of jobs.
the roman numbers also has no number zero.
very little is known about his personal life.
the greeks thought that the earth was the center of the universe.
this is a list of famous mexicans.
the aztecs said that they found his body in the streets with a lot of cuts made with a sword after the spanish left.
his own tribe killed the first moctezuma
he fought two wars against the united states.
in the first war (1836) he won the famous battle of the alamo, but later he lost the war and was taken prisoner by the americans.
he also lost the second war (1846-1848),
this system was used to mistreat and deny rights to non-white people.
many countries and the united nations were very upset at the south african government for their policies.
one of the first laws that were created to separate people said that non white people could not marry white people.
this law was made in 1949.
ten years after this a law was made to stop non white people going to universities for white people.
the people who wanted apartheid wanted all people with different colored skin to live in different places.
they said that people from different places should always be kept apart when they were in cities.
they sometimes forced people out of their home to do this.
his punishment was to be sent to a prison island in south america for the rest of his life.
but the army did not want to admit that it had been wrong.
many of those who thought dreyfus was a spy hated jews and believed that he was a criminal because he was a jew, and that a jew could not be a good frenchman; this belief is called anti-semitism.
others thought that the army could not be questioned.
the other side believed that an innocent man should not be imprisoned, and feared that dreyfus's enemies were also enemies of the republic.
there are also umpires, who watch everything carefully to decide what happened, and make sure everyone follows the rules.
the bases form a line that goes around the field to the right from the starting base.
the team that is playing defense always has the ball.
this is different from other team sports.
when the team on defense gets three players out it is their turn to hit.
then the team that was batting starts playing defense, and the team that was playing defense starts batting.
after nine innings, the team that has the most runs is the winner.
the team in the field tries not to let the team at bat get any runs.
this pair is often called the "battery".
the second baseman's job is to cover the area to the right of second base and to back the first baseman up.
the shortstop's job is to cover the area between second and third bases.
the shortstop also covers second or third base and the near part of left field.
left field and right field are on the left and right sides, if you look out from home plate.
center field is straight ahead from home plate.
a team can use as many pitchers as it wants to, but it is rare to use more than eight in a game.
most pitchers use two or more different pitches.
so the pitcher cannot take more than one step forward when he throws the ball.
pitchers usually end up with a lot of injuries.
this order is called the "lineup".
but the team can use a player who was not on the lineup.
then he is not a base runner.
there are seven games in the series.
jews are not allowed to say this name, and instead say "adonai".
these included making weapons and food.
it played a big role in the war effort in the first and second world wars.
the war was won by the north.
slavery and control of the government
there were two important areas where the american civil war was fought - in the west and in the east.
these two cities are only about 90 miles apart.
even though the north had more soldiers, they could not capture richmond until the end of the war in 1865.
this victory is considered to be one of the turning points of the war.
many soldiers died for both sides during the war.
the south was hurt the most because most of the war was fought there.
the 14th amendment makes it clear that all people born in the united states are citizens with equal rights that cannot be taken away unless they do something against the law.
this may have been from a riding accident.
it also means to "be strong and be able to survive alone".
the word is usually used in a good way.
a country gets its independence when it is no longer part of another country.
this was done by a peaceful vote, although many other countries in the area fought wars.
anubis is the greek name for the ancient god in egyptian mythology who looks like a man with the head of a jackal.
this made the people think that the jackals protected the dead people in the graves.
the egyptian people believed that anubis helped with the ceremony that was performed with people once they arrived in heaven.
in this ceremony, the heart of the dead was weighed to see if the deceased person had lived a good life.
the egyptians believed he was the father of all the gods.
one of the most famous acts of anti-semitism was during world war ii.
when he was 8 years old he ran away from home and he joined the army.
the spanish language is one of the most common romance languages that came from the latin language.
the spanish language is used by many people in the world today.
the countries that have spanish as a official language are called the hispanic countries
it was the language spoken by the aztecs, the toltecs and perhaps by the people of teotihuacan.
he is one of the most clever living people.
the most famous coast guard is the united states coast guard (uscg).
an equilibrium market price is the price at which there is no tendency for it to change.
they get their energy by changing some of their matter into energy.
this is because a diamond is very useful - it is very hard and it spreads light very well.
they are the rarest of stones and some people will do anything to get their hands on them.
but in places like south africa, they must dig deep down into a diamond mine to get diamonds.
many of the pilgrims died during their first winter in north america.
they were cold and did have enough food.
at harvest time in the winterof 1621, they were very thankful that they had a good crop of food to eat during the coming winter.
they thanked god and the wampanoags for teaching them how to grow crops.
they invited three of the wampanoags who had helped them to their feast.
there were so many people that the pilgrims did not have enough food to make the meal, so the wampanoags brought along their own food for the feast.
the food eaten today for thanksgiving is much different than the food that was eaten at the first thanksgiving in 1621.
when a computer shows two things on the screen, or controls two things in real life (like robots), it does not know that these are solid and can crash into each other.
there are many different kinds of bsd that many people have worked on.
they were chased away by an angry crowd who discovered they were not muslims, and continued north to kenya.
he sailed on his next trip in 1502, after he found out that the people of calicut had killed the portuguese he had left behind.
most people go to college right after high school but other people choose to go later in life.
college is a career choice that most people make because it will help them to earn more money and live better lives.
the very first batteries were invented in the middle east around 1000 b.c.
film comes in a can called canisters to cover it from lights rays.film needs the right amount of light to make a picture.
after he lost his job for the king of portugal, he went to work for the king of spain.
he was also the first to sail through the strait of magellan, so it was named for him.
this was the first ship known to sail around the world.
one of the crew, henry, a malay interpreter who was picked up by magellan on his earlier trip for portugal, became the very first person known to travel all the way around the world, when they reached his home country and he stayed there.
he got his name because he organized many ocean voyages on which lands were found.
the concrete is then poured into place into formwork, and after a few hours it sets hard.
it is a very difficult event and runners should practice running many miles before they compete.
there was an important battle in greece.
there was an army from persia that came to fight the army from athens.
the battle was held at a place called marathon.
the army from athens was not expected to win, but they did.
he ran about 25 miles back to town.
they had a race called the marathon.
this included part of what is now switzerland.
it was a province until 1790.
latin is an old language that was spoken by the romans.
people do not speak or write this language very much any more, but many students around the world study it in school.
latin was the most important language in the middle ages.
many languages spoken today came from the latin language.
the romance languages are very close to each other, and it is possible for the speakers of one romance language to understand another to at least some extent.
the dark ages are given this name because during this period of time europe was in disarray, and it wasn't fun to live there.
this new world seemed to have little to offer, and drastic weather changes seem to have killed off the small colony left behind in north america.
it is also called the age of chivalry, since that was the period of the knights.
during this period the knowledge which was lost after the fall of the western rome was slowly regained and re-assumed.
many of those survive and are used even today.
he died because of injuries he got on a battle against france, he is buried in amsterdam.
the song has 4 stanzas but only the first one is usually sung.
o’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?
long may it wave
o’er the land of the free and the home of the brave!
a home and a country should leave us no more?
o’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.
o’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.
a needle is a small tool used to push or pull a thread through a small hole.
the needle consists of a short stick with a sharp point at one end and hole for the thread at the other end.
once the thread is put through the hole in the needle and "doubled-back" so that it cannot fall out, then the whole needle and its thread can be put through the material.
some countries are divided into provinces.
she is the leader of the government.
both of these are needed for all living creatures, including humans, but they do not need to be eaten in the form of salt, where they are found together in large amounts.
salt is used to control the amount of water in the body.
because salt can make things last longer, using it was one of the important things that let civilization get started in places like egypt.
food could now be kept past its season, and taken on long trips.
people often traded salt for other things.
after people learned how to get salt from the ocean, salt became cheaper.
another use of salt was in war, as a way to punish a city by ruining its crops.
the assyrians are said to have been one of the first to have done this to their neighbours.
the profit is divided into two parts.
a carpenter or electrician who works for himself usually brings everything they need for work in their truck, and fishermen who stay out at sea work out of their boats.
it is one of the four seasons.
winter begins on the winter solstice.
he was also a famous poet.
after a few months he was taken prisoner and executed.
about half the countries in the world have a death penalty, the other half do not.
over half the countries in the world have abolished the death penalty in law and practice: 75 countries have abolished the capital punishment for all crimes and another 20 can be considered abolitionist in practice.
most of the countries that have a death penalty use it on murderers, and for other serious crimes such as rape or terrorism.
he was replaced by ban ki-moon.
the united nations is where all member countries meet to talk about things with each other, to prevent wars.
each member country has one vote.
any material that cannot be grown must be mined.
a person who works in a mine is called a miner.
safety rules and special safety equipment is used to try and protect miners from accidents.
the first bombers were made at the start of world war i.
bombers usually fly low to the ground and can fly at slow speeds.
many people feel strongly against hls.
there are many small villages in huntingdon, it has a high street and a main supermarket.
it is important to know how to use a condom before using one.
it is necessary to know that female and male condom should not be used at the same time.
in this case both condoms may rub against each other and this will result in failure.
because it is located by the sea it is good for transportation.
it is called this because it can play soft sounds and loud sounds, something that most keyboard instruments could not do when it was invented.
there are also two or three pedals that people use by pressing them down with their feet.
things that avoid pain are also good.
there are different beliefs in hedonism.
some people believe it is important to get as many pleasurable experiences as possible, others believe that the quality of the pleasure matters.
epicureanism is where people like to be happy but they do so slowly so that they cause less pain to themselves.
they also look more into the future and go for the higher pleasures in life.
bronze is an important metal, because it can be shaped into useful things, but it was more important before the use of iron was spread.
copper is important in the human body.
each royal family has its own rules saying who is called a prince.
in most of these families, the son of a king or a queen is a prince.
they can be extracted in many ways and are valuable for mining.
he was forced to leave the senate in 2002, but he once again was not arrested, this time because it was said he suffered from dementia.
they are parents of 3 daughters.
they try to do this by getting their band back together again.
the place is run by matt's wife, and she does not want them to join the band.
they are arrested right after paying the taxes.
this was because they were afraid another battle would have to be fought.
this war was won by the indonesians.
some think this is his best album.
at first mussolini was a socialist, but when he wanted italy to join the first world war he was thrown out of the socialist party.
italy was thrown out of the league of nations because of this aggression.
in 1940, he sent italy into the second world war on the side of the axis countries.
he started getting interest from that time.
axis countries and axis powers are the names for some countries that fought together during world war ii.
several countries were created during the war by the axis.
advisors are people who give advice.
the job of an advisor is to give good advice that helps the person that he or she is advising.
this is because these kinds of people are usually very busy, and they do not have the time to make decisions alone.
this can also be written as formula_2.
this can also be written as formula_4.
one of the borders was the one between the new united kingdom of the netherlands and prussia.
both countries wanted to have this mine.
the mine was just to the north of this road.
the people from moresnet were allowed to choose in which army they wanted to serve, but they weren't allowed to have their own army.
there are 9 days left in the year.
messiah or the anointed one is the figure promised by god to the jews for the salvation of the world.
the jews think that the messiah will be a human being that will save israel and lead the whole world into the end of days and eternal peace.
other people in real life or fiction are called messianic if they have the qualities of a messiah, or people think they will bring about a better world.
most jews do not think that jesus christ is the messiah, or that a messiah has come for them.
muslims believe in jesus as the son of mary the messiah and as a mighty prophet of god.
he stopped eating in protest three times because of low pay and bad working conditions.
many cities have streets named for him.
many small rivers or creek flow over the mountain and into the bay or lake.
there are three different ways to count the number of people in hamilton.
the people of hamilton are from many different countries and speak many different languages.
this means stelco asked the courts if it could stop paying money it borrowed back to banks.
then the second world war started and people got jobs again in the army and building guns for the army.
people of all ages can run in the.
the are like the olympics for people who used to be ruled by britain.
using go however is not a part of the hsr.
the city streets in the old city of hamilton follow a pattern.
the big streets going north and south are in straight lines.
streets are called "south" if they are south of king or queenston.
king and main streets are major roads that are almost parallel or side by side one another.
so instead of thinking of them as two streets, think of them as one street with a very wide boulevard between them.
they can look like anything and can have any number of sides.
the sides can be straight or curved.
the ink of the pen is pressed onto paper and dries very quickly.
like the quill pen, they have to be dipped in ink many times during writing or drawing.
it has a very small metal ball on the writing end that rolls the ink onto the paper.
a "stylus" is a pen that cannot write on paper and is usually made out of plastic.
they are usually used with touchscreens.
when they write in leet they try to write it in a special way, so that it is very different from english.
a waterfall is where there is a sharp fall of water found on a river or stream.
the water flows from higher land, then it falls down a big step of rock to lower land where it will continue on its journey.
the roar from the falling water is very loud and the sound makes beautiful music.
most people find them very beautiful and inspiring.
the act of caring for a garden by watering the flowers and plants and removing the weeds is called gardening.
but farms are much larger than gardens.
a garden can have a place to barbecue, to sit and to read.
about 1000 years ago they began to build their town in stone.
this shows they bought and sold things over great distances.
the incas built houses, fields and temples by cutting the rock on the mountain so it was flat.
nobody knows why they did that, but some think it was because they were scared of the spanish.
it has only one way in and a stone wall to protect it.
he showed the first apple i to the boss at hewlett-packard, but they did not want his computer.
most spiritual believers think something exists that is a part of everything else.
the height of a human being 8 to 12 years old is near 1 meter.
starting at the size of a human hair - and smaller - this is where we observe the tiny parts of our world.
we cannot actually see them - except for rare experiments like what bill phillips did by making a lot of them stop moving.
because although they are small they are also very high in energy.
them we will watch the pieces of them as they fly apart.
the model we learn at school for the most part is that it is all straight and 3 + 1 dimensional.
but what happens if moebius strip is cut right down the middle with a pair of scissors?
now when we consider great energies and small distances it is not difficult to imagine how we find that things really curve up onto each other.
light was first thought to be made of particles.
it turns out that both theories are correct - light is somehow both a wave and a particle.
the city is very wide and has a lot of lakes inside it; several parts of it are built on islands.
that way more force can be applied.
the followers of jesus reported in the scriptures as they witnessed it - that he was resurrected by god the father and appeared to over 500 people for forty days before he ascended into heaven.
it's believed that he later sent the holy spirit onto his disciples at pentecost when they spoke in tongues and understood each others different languages.
he was given the keys of the kingdom of heaven and was the first to recognize jesus as messiah when questioned by jesus as to "who do you say that i am?"
in time, the church split apart with fights over who is right; these fights caused breaks in the church called schisms.
most schisms happen because of people have different beliefs about what is true, but politics is often a big reason for these fights too.
some eastern orthodox churches believe the emperor or king is the head of the church as well as the country.
the next big schism was the protestant reformation, which protested against the central authority of the church in rome and against what it thought were wrong ways of doing and believing things about god in the catholic church.
one of the most famous people in this period is king henry viii of england, who started the anglican church because he wanted to divorce his first wife and the pope said he was not allowed to do that.
a nail is a metal object with a flat head and a long sharp tip.
a dictatorship is a country where one person has the power to do whatever he or she wants.
the ruler is called a dictator.
in a dictatorship, people usually do not have many rights or much freedom.
if something has a charge it will move towards something else that has an opposite charge or away from some thing with the same charge.
so 2 things with a + charge will move apart and so will two things with a - charge.
if two things have different charges + and - or - and + they will be pulled together.
in many ways the flow of electrons is like the flow of water down a hill.
the heat is used to turn water into steam.
geothermal power stations use the heat from rocks deep inside the earth to heat water in pipes in order to turn it into steam.
wind energy is another where the force of the wind is used to turn giant, noisy and some might say ugly 'wind turbines'.
she is a soldier who fights evil using the power of good.
it makes them either stop hurting, or go completely to sleep during surgery.
2008, he announced that he would not return to power
he was trained as a military lawyer.
other people do not think this is true.
everything on the west side of the line belonged to spain and everything to the east belonged to portugal.
large numbers also died because of the diseases brought by the spanish.
is the home of all three branches of the u.s.
is called many things by many different people.
this can be confusing because there is also a u.s.
today this river is one of the most polluted in the world.
was planned before it was built.
is not a state, and its citizens have less control over their city than most americans.
often do not agree on what is best.
this is a protest over the fact that the people who live in d.c.
during this period of life, most children go through the physical stages of puberty, which often begin before a person has reached the age of 13.
this album though only really sold well when he became more famous in 1973.
a saxophone is a musical instrument that is made of brass and often just called a "sax".
due to the fact it is made from brass it is often involved in what is referred to as a brass section alongside true brass instruments like the trumpet or trombone.
there are several different kinds of saxophone.
this was called making a pilgrimage.
these deaths were a cause of the first world war (world war i).
as a young man he joined a small group who wanted the slavs in the south of austria-hungary to join with serbia in a new country.
those powerful people were called the black hand.
the law in austria-hungary said only people older than 21 could be killed, even when the crime was as bad as killing royalty like ferdinand.
they put him in a very bad prison.
the prison was so bad that he became ill and he died in 1918.
but it was just about impossible for serbia to do all the things on the list fast enough, because the austrians really wanted war with serbia.
usually the formula is use the same way in at all times.
for example, the formula to find the area of a square is the length times its breadth.
the members of this group either want their country to leave the european union, or want to change it.
a musician is also someone who writes music, even if they write it for other people to play.
people who write music are called composers.
usually that part is left out if they also play or sing the music they write, but they are still composers because they wrote the music.
if it is only a few people together it is usually just called a band.
the latin name of the plant is usually given as "daucus carota".
many people use it as a vegetable.
conservatives want the government to act to either protect our current way of life, or to return to a better way of life that we used to enjoy.
in everyday life, a machine is a thing that helps a person to do something by using or changing energy.
daniel has 90 days to get a job and a place to live.
epistemology is considered to be one of the basic areas of study of philosophy.
philosophers (people who think about philosophy) who are interested in epistemology think about whether it is possible to have knowledge, what kind of knowledge there is, and how people actually come to know about things.
it will be sold as the same model everywhere in the world.
the series is thought by many people to be a great situation comedy.
the park seems like a great idea to the people building the park.
he also explained how the things he wrote about could actually happen.
some of his books have been made into movies.
it was the second biggest city in the world after london at one point in the 1800s.
one of the oldest paddle-steamer boats is in glasgow, and in the summer one can travel down the clyde to visit other towns and islands.
it was named after the grampian mountains which start in this region.
its name is because it is on the border with england.
it covers most of the area which people call the scottish highlands.
it is named after the river clyde.
a long time ago, strathclyde was also the name of one of the kingdoms which united to form scotland.
it was named after the river tay.
it is the fourth largest city in scotland.
oxford is filled with history and culture from a time before we lived with its wonderful museums, universities and lots of old sightseeings.
george vi of the united kingdom
he was followed by his daughter queen elizabeth ii.
zoroastrians believe people are free to choose between good and bad, but that choosing good will lead to happiness, and that choosing bad will lead to unhappiness.
so it is the best to choose good.
this is also needed to get happiness.
they are against people living on their own to find god, like in monasteries.
when this happens all the creation will be reunited with ahura mazda, even the souls of those who died or who were banished.
an onomatopoeia is a word that tries to sound the same as a real sound we might hear.
other famous people from essex include
it could also be the biggest or most important town in the county.
it has a famous pier which is one of the longest in the world.
it was so long that a railway line was built along it.
today he does not want to talk about his religion.
her parents agreed to let her train as a teacher.
she had sent many of them to magazines but had never had any published.
she left teaching and began to have more success with her books.
she is also included because she wrote more books than almost any other writer.
she said that she found writing them easy.
her books still sell in large numbers, and used to be owned by her family.
a few years ago her family sold them, and now her works belong to a private company.
enid blyton did a lot of work for charity and had a club for children which helped them to give money to charity.
she was married twice and had two daughters.
"every object stays at rest or stays moving at the same speed unless something makes it change."
he has a sharp mind and is able to solve even the most difficult and unusual cases.
people sometimes get surprised because he takes cocaine and morphine.he was the best detective in the world and it will always stay that way.he wore a hat because he was balding.
pig latin is an language code or game and is most often used by children who speak english.
pig latin that you write is sometimes written with dashes, between the first part and the "c-ay" letters, and sometimes it is not.
a nickname is a special name that a person may be called that is different from their real name or from the name they were given by their parents.
the name may be given to them by their friends.
nicknames often come from how a person looks, or from something they are especially known for doing.
he worked hard to make people understand that black people should always be treated equal to white people.
that is when they had to sit at the back of the bus separate from white people.
he soon became world famous when he told his supporters, and the people who were against equal rights, that only peaceful ways should be used to solve the problem.
after this he continued to work with many others to fight against poverty and the vietnam war.
one of these people was the singer stevie wonder who wrote a song as part of the campaign.
it is about a boy who gets trapped in a game for 30 years, and must finish playing the game when he gets out.
many people of many different ages join neopets.
once the user has gone to that page, they get a message that says they can use that avatar.
there are also many sites for users to find ways to change the look of the pages that tell about themselves and their pets.
she was born in 1819, and became queen at only age 18.
at first she was not popular with the people she ruled, because they thought she showed little interest in what happened to them.
after several years of writing the books, daniel let the public know that he was behind the name of lemony snicket.
some say the change is natural and not the fault of humans.
others think that variations in the amount of heat from the sun and other natural causes.
al gore is one of the people who tried to stop global warming, and started to make people think about changing their lifestyles
it would cost a lot of money to cut off global warming in its tracks.
if we spend a little money now to help solve the problem of global warming now, then we can save ourselves from losing a lot of money later in life when the erroneous effects of global warming occur.
make sure your tank is big enough and it may help if you have a filter.
it was built in 1997-2000 to celebrate the beginning of the third millennium.
the most successful part of the exhibition was the stage show that was held two or three times each day in the middle of the dome.
about 6 and a half million people visited the exhibition, which was only half the number its owners hoped for.
he soon discovers that there are a lot of magic people in the world, living unknown to most ordinary people.
each book tells about one year of his life at school, about the people that he meets there, the things that he learns, and his adventures.
there are seven books total in the series.
it is the story of three sister witches known as the charmed ones who fight demons and warlocks.
the story begins when phoebe finds the book of shadows after seeing the word "attic" spelled out on the spirit board.
this continues until the seventh season.
they give up magic to have normal lives.
but the magic is still alive.
he died at the end of season 1.
she died at the end of season 3.
he power is stronger when she feels the need to protect herself and her sisters, or protect the innocents or the other good creatures.
phoebe was married to a demon.
phoebe has the power to see the past and the future, the ability to levitate, and is able to read others feelings/thoughts.
she is the youngest of the sisters.
she finally receives the power to heal in the middle of season 8.
he later joined a group of beings called the avatars.
his demon side was strongest until he met and fell in love with phoebe.
he would stop at nothing to win her back but he never succeeded.
he was sent to phoebe by the elders to help her find love.
he realizes that he loves her and he wants to be with her.
he is one of the only people who understood paiges powers well not understood but accepted, there love is very strong.
the source of all evil is a very powerful demon who rules the underworld.
the book of shadows has been around since beginning of the family line.
each generation has added to the book of shadows making it more and more powerful.
for example, in the final episode, each of the sisters adds all that they have learned so that future generations of halliwell witches can learn from their experiences.
the media can also mean the people who write for and work in the media.
the main income for the people is from fishing and sheep farming.
oil and gas has been found below the sea around the islands.
there is also oil and gas outside the sea area that belongs to the uk.
they both walked on the moon, and millions of people watched and heard this event on live television.
he spoke those words when he set foot on the moon.
when he was young he would help his parents around the house like weeding the garden and hanging the laundry, he would do this with his sister and brother dean and june.
a caretaker is someone who has the job of looking after a building.
it has often been acted on stage and has been on tv.
there have been many books written about him.
reasons for not eating meat vary.
some think that it is wrong to kill animals, others think that eating meat is bad for their health or the world.
this is because land used for animals can be used to grow food.
some people who call themselves vegetarians and eat fish or sea food are not vegetarians, because fish and sea animals are also animals.
such people are sometimes called "pescetarians".
there are also many people who are not vegetarians, but do not eat too much animal food.
there is also a philosophy called freeganism, it means eating animal products only if otherwise they will be thrown away to garbage - such as food thrown away by restaurants.
it is a matter of conscience more than anything else.
the vedic and puranic scriptures of hinduism explain that animals have souls and the act of killing animals brings bad karma because the killer will suffer the pain of the animal he has killed in this life or the next.
he carried on writing short stories while he waited for patients.
augustine school for deaf and blind and while he was there his mother died.
he also learned how to write music and play various musical instruments.
his father died two years later.
they are made in italy and are very expensive.
note that there is not "methene".
he grew up with his brother and his sister and spent a lot of time with his grandfather.
johnny became worse at school and had his first experiences with drugs at the age of 15.
since then he has been a star.
young people loved him, but this was not what he liked, so he took drugs and was in the news because of this.
but his career went on and he played in lots of famous movies.
he is not only liked for his look but also for his talent to act and his incomparable gestures.
this means they have their own local government, their own police and some control over their own community.
the north of catalonia is less hot than the rest of spain, and has more hills and trees.
it was opened for use in 1937.
also the water was very deep in the middle - 102 m - and there was a lot of wind and fog that could make the construction difficult.
but it was difficult for the governments to sell the bonds at the time because of the wall street crash of 1929.
during the construction only eleven men died because the builders put a net under the bridge for the safety of the builders.
they fall 75 meters and most of them die when they hit the water.
the kitchen is the room in the house where food is cooked.
most often it is done by a team of people.
it often takes the team a long time to make the programs that they are asked to write.
a student is a person who is learning something.
students can be children or teenagers who are going to school, but it may also be other people who are learning, such as in college.
the suburbs are still part of the city but may have a different name than the main city or town.
as cities grow outwards, they begin to take over the surrounding countryside.
many large cities have many skyscrapers.
people also did not like walking up many stairs.
the integers have no end in either direction, which means that no number is the largest and no number is the smallest.
natural numbers are the numbers used for counting things.
natural numbers are also called counting numbers.
they could also be said to be the set of all possible numbers of elements in any finite set.
the golden rule is to "do to others what you would have them do to you."
this means - treat others how you would like to be treated.
it is called the "golden" rule because there is value in having this kind of respect and caring attitude for one another.
the principle that was shared is to not always treat others as they might deserve to be treated, as we may judge some as undeserving, but instead to always be merciful and charitable, not withholding good.
what jesus said was to not be judgemental, as we all make mistakes, do not focus on the behavior of others, but instead focus on your own behavior and attitude and let it be good.
if every one gave freely of themselves in this way we would become rich indeed and perhaps begin to see the goodness of god in effect as he intended it to be.
it can be written either in active form (do to others what you would have them do to you) or in passive form (do to others what you would have them do to you).
is said at the beginning of every episode.
he was so popular that some people know him as only "elvis".
the mount everest is the largest and highest mountain in the world.
the drink is made by pepsico.
they form the family "spheniscidae", the only family of the order "sphenisciformes".
they have good hearing and can see well underwater.
to ask for candy and then the people give it to them.
children today usually do not do the tricks if they do not get treats.
it is the day that the souls of dead people come back to earth.
it is about being with (remembering) family or friends who have died.
she used ideas about things that had happened to her.
it is a member of asean.
it was a true story about two brothers who did some strange things.
the song was based on moon unit making fun of some local girls at her school.
he often tried to see what he could get away with, which sometimes got him in trouble.
it is a state of australia.
it also has the smallest population.
this was especially true because it was really seen to be about criticizing the vietnam war that was going on at the time.
they say this is because he changed his opinion too often.
he is a legendary person who people have told stories about for many years.
over time, people made a hole at the bottom of the basket so the ball could go through more easily.
however, if you try to block them over the back or through the arms it is considered a foul.
a position is a job or role that a player has to take part in to play the game.
if everyone is doing their job correctly, the team is usually successful.
usually it is someone who helped the common people or fought against the authorities, such as a bad king.
he was named after linus pauling.
he is the one person who can make decisions about changes or future development on the operating system.
he now lives with his family in the united states.
jefferson was very smart and studied many things at school and college.
he was a leader of those who wanted the same thing.
he got the second highest number of votes and as was the law at the time, became vice-president.
each side did things that could have made the united states enter the war.
some of the urban area is in france.
it had at one time been the capital of the kingdom of burgundy.
many events take place on the island but everyone feels guilty and sorry for their actions in the end and they head back to italy, milan safely all thanks to prospero's spirit, ariel.
the "dates" may be based on how things in the sky seem to move, like the sun or moon.
they were one of the most popular rock groups of all time.
he was often called "the man in black" and was best known for his rough voice and powerful music.
this was how the greeks explained the seasons.
the language was planned as a better version of the
both sides blame each other for starting the war.
the war ended with a truce.
truman had just spent a lot of money to make the american army much bigger and americans wanted to see this new powerful army in action.
the united nations had just been created and a war would give it the chance to prove to people that the un was strong and would not fail like the league of nations had done earlier.
it was built in 1886 and given as a gift from france.
it serves to greet visitors and immigrants.
it can only be reached by boat or ferry.
as a young child he watched his father be killed by a robber after leaving a theater.
from the shock of the event his mother had a heart attack.
as he grew up he trained in fighting.
wayne took the idea of the bat to put fear into the hearts of criminals in his home town of gotham.
he often had wise things to say about the humans around him.
lincoln up close and i knew he was a tall man, however nothing could have prepared me for the sight of him.
a long shadow did he have.
and ran across the stage and toward the back of the theatre.
annapolis is the oldest seat of government still in service in america.
on his final visit to a rehab centre, he jumped a wall and escaped to his home.
but there is a lot of talk and debate about it.
whales are thought to sleep around 8 hours a day
this allows the ink to go through easily.
a lot of ink can come out from it at one time.
anchors are used to stop boats from moving.
a temporary anchor can be moved and is carried on the boat.
the oldest anchors were just rocks, and many rock anchors have been found from a long time ago.
the wood arms are sharp to enter the seabed, and the weight will hold normal movement.
the english language uses several special words to describe parts of anchors.
some old anchors have attached to the shank a "stock", which is a bar that places the anchor in a certain way when it falls on the seabed.
it is very old and has not changed much over time.
it is less useful than a good modern design, and its holding power for its weight is among the worst of all anchor types.
many copies of it now exist.
many copies are now made - this type of anchor is now called a "claw-type".
they can set quickly in some seabeds, but do not hold well for their weight, and can let go very suddenly.
they must be allowed to set by sinking over a long time.
this causes birds to not be able to migrate to the right place because they can't follow the moon and stars.
light trespass is when light being used by a person goes into the property of another.
there are now several groups that are trying to prevent light pollution.
you can lower the amount of light pollution by having lights off when they are not needed.
the public transport is also very important for the people who live there.
people with a lot of money can even buy their own small submarine to explore under the sea and look at fish.
this power was then used to power the submarine when it went underwater.
these submarines were dangerous for enemies and hard to see while under water but it was easy to attack them when they were above the water and recharging.
they were only used to attack ships.
these submarines often have a system which can get air from the surrounding seawater as well, this combination allows them to stay under water until their food runs out.
it has a border with israel to the south, and syria to the east and north.
another good thing about c is that it is available for many different platforms.
he is said to be 15 in the first two seasons, and 16-17 in the last two seasons.
both brothers are fed up of megan.
it still shows the show in reruns.
she does not know the names of any cast member that is not amanda.
a court, in law, is a part of the government that decides what laws mean when people disagree.
some disagreements a court may decide are whether a person is guilty of a crime, who is the legal owner of property, or who the children of two divorced parents should live with.
a court is usually in a special building called a courthouse.
most countries have many courts that deal with different issues.
some courts are higher and can change a decision made by a lower court.
it is sometimes thought of as the beginning of life.
pollution is when something causes some sort of damage or problem because it is where it is not supposed to be, or there is too much of it.
immunity is being able to keep from getting sick from a certain disease.
when your body has defended itself against the virus/bacteria it will trap the certain virus/bacteria in a "net" so when the virus/bacteria comes back it will be easier to trap those viruses/bacteria as well.
a roman numeral is the name for a number when it is written in the way the romans used to write numbers.
they are used to write the names of kings and queens, or popes.
they may be used to write the year a book or movie was made.
proper form is to subtract only a value with the next lower power of 10.
a map is usually a picture of the earth or part of the earth.
there are a lot of ways that use mathematics to make projections.
as described in the book of genesis, noah and his family kept believing in god in a time when most people were not.
knowing this was true, god told noah he was going to flood the world, so he could drown out evil.
he told noah to build a boat called an "ark".
people laughed at noah at first, but soon they were killed by the flood.
the people on the ark stayed on the boat not only until the flood was over, but until they reached land.
to find land noah had sent out a dove, which returned with an olive branch.
this showed that they were close to land.
after the flood, god made a rainbow to say he would never do something like the flood again to earth.
it also comes on family channel
in some countries, cabinets need to be given their job by those who are in the government.
a person younger than 15 years old is usually called a child.
a baby that is not yet born is often called a child, too.
a person can be called his or her parent's child, no matter how old he or she is.
but in other countries, children work in factories or in the fields with their parents or guardians.
he was famous for his peanut growing business which made him rich.
this did not work because he was not prepared to compromise.
he did help egypt and israel sign a peacetreaty.
he was born in new york.
he used his power to stop big companies and rich people who owned them from making life hard for their workers.
he was so popular that his face was put on mount rushmore.
this means that they think up (invent) the music as they play it.
during a service they may need to play some organ music to fill in the gaps while people are collecting money or taking communion.
popular and rock or soul music writers are often not able to read and write music down.
many songs are written by two or more people.
it is common for two people to work together to write songs.
one person writes the music and one writes the words (the lyrics).
some songs such as folk songs were composed many years ago and no one knows who wrote them.
he is best remembered for having had six wives.
the pope did not want to do this, because he was afraid of what would happen next.
he then forced all priests and bishops to accept him as the new leader.
most of the men who received money and land from the closed monasteries were protestants.
she soon gave birth to a son called edward.
henry had loved her very much and he never got over his sadness at her death.
she was a woman in her thirties who had already been married twice.
her first two husbands had been much older than her, and both had died.
none of them had any children of their own.
the number of players will depend on what music they are playing and the size of the place where they are playing.
if the music says "solo" in their part it is the principal who will play the solo.
this is because they are playing most of the time and usually form the basis of the music.
if they are not playing the tune they will probably be accompanying.
the strings sit at the front of the stage in a fan-shape in front of the conductor.
it depends on the piece of music.
if the two instruments do play at the same time an extra player will be needed for the piccolo.
some of these come in several sizes.
modern horns have at least three valves and are usually in f. they often sit in a different place to the other brass.
this is because they are mostly loud and can be heard easily over the rest of the orchestra.
it is difficult to say when the orchestra was invented because instruments have played together for many centuries.
it is difficult to say how many people are homosexual.
it all depends on the definition.
there are many different words to describe homosexual people.
some of these are used to insult homosexual people.
this is done to make the words less hurtful.
the first two are words many homosexual men say about themselves.
the last four are more hurtful.
when homosexual people do not tell people their sexual orientation, they are said to be "in the closet".
this means he or she does not hide the fact that he or she is homosexual.
some gay and lesbian people stay in the closet because of fear of what would happen or because they live in a place that is not safe for homosexuals.
it means they are celebrating and being happy that they are homosexual.
these riots happened because police harassed and arrested people for being homosexual.
some homosexual people have marriage ceremonies even though governments do not recognize or accept them.
but to them, the important part about marriage is not just the name.
married people get many benefits from being married.
some people even say this is like the "separate but equal" rules that were used to segregate people by race in the united states.
they believe that separate is "never" equal and homosexuals should not accept being second class citizens.
a homosexual person can be fired from a job because he is gay - even if he is a good worker.
homosexuals also can be denied renting a home or even being able to eat in a restaurant because of their sexual orientation.
homosexual sex between adults is not a crime.
so although the united kingdom has changed many things, homosexuals still do not have full equal rights there.
they fight for the rights and safety of homosexuals.
for instance, to take a picture of something far away a person might use a zoom lens.
there are many kinds of lenses.
there is over hundred year effort to provide various ways to get good pictures.
each counted on the other to help make their songs better, so they agreed to share the credit equally.
he had to work hard to prove his talent was still strong.
the two men often helped to make each other's songs better, so they liked to share writing credit.
each wife had different ideas, and encouraged their husbands to depend less on each other.
the four former beatles could not always agree on what to do with the things they owned together.
it took years to work out what to still own in common, what to divide up, and what to let go.
they decided that they wanted to be together more than anyone else could want them apart, and they reunited.
father and son shared the same birthday.
it made them feel that a special part of their lives was gone.
we say when it was "invented".
new things that are made or created are called inventions.
they think that too much of something can lead to an invention.
she is the widow of john lennon.
the coast is where the land meets the sea.
if a house is near to the coast we say it is "on the coast".
when we talk about a long part of the coast we call it "the coast-line".
coasts often have many living things on it and is a habitat for many animals and plants.
he was born and grew up in liverpool, england, and was first famous as a member of the beatles.
the two men worked well together and became close friends.
even music was not as important to harrison as his wanting people to learn to get along with each other, and to make the world a better place.
although very old now he still plays.
a sentence is a group of words that are put together to mean something.
there is no verb, so we do not know anything about the happy dog.
another meaning of sentence is the punishment that a court gives for a crime, such as the time for which a person is put in prison.
this is the road to take
read a book about the history of america
there are beautiful flowers growing in the garden
the cushions are new and i can experience the comfort well
he was famous for his eyepatch, which he wore because of eye damage.
his books are written in a special style.
he also began to have a lot of problems with his eye and his family.
it is a very difficult book.
a meal is a serving of food eaten by human beings.
meals have different names by time they are taken or by the type of food that is eaten.
the morning meal is called breakfast.
people who are working at jobs are given a break to eat their lunch.
in england, some people have a glass of beer with their lunch.
evil means anything which is bad or wrong.
people usually say that an action which hurts people or breaks certain rules is evil.
however, a person or a group that does evil things can also be called evil.
some think that evil proves that there is not a god.
others think that god lets evil happen so that people can choose "not" to do evil.
ethics tries to explain why some actions are good and other actions are evil.
it gives all kinds of answers for how to tell evil from good.
he was best known for his work with the muppets, which he helped to create.
a lot of the philosophy of this movement was based on a idea that the aryan race was superior to all others and had the greatest ability to survive.
this law made it possible to catch the people who had burned the reichstag.
the nazis did this so that they would then be the only large party left in the parliament.
sometimes they also ban questioning the number of people affected by it, that is saying that not so many people were killed as most people think.
in recent years he has become an activist for various causes, like animal rights and world peace.
beauty and the beast
it tells the story of a merchant who is lost in the woods.
he finds the palace of a beast who wants to kill him, and makes a deal with the beast, to have his daughter in exchange.
his idea was to build a new place to trade, which would be more popular than tallinn.
they think jehovah is the most powerful being that created the heavens and the earth and all living things.
they do not believe in the trinity.
they believe that god will make the earth a paradise for them, and also bring back to life those who died in the past into that paradise.
they also think that only their religion is true, good people willing to listen to god will survive armageddon.
they think that when adam and eve sinned, and god sent them away from eden, and that people get sick and die because of that.
they believe that the purpose of jehovah sending his son jesus christ to die was to make a way for humans to get back the paradise that adam and eve lost and restore them to perfect health and life.
they believe god wants them to do it, so they can live on a peaceful earth forever.
a wife is a married woman.
in coutries and times it has been different how many wives can a man have legally.
there are some names for special kinds of wives.
a queen is a wife of a king.
in contrary a child between a man and a woman who is not his wife is called illegitimate child or a bastard.
they are one of the most popular musical groups of all time.
they do not even exist in africa.
it became a city in 2000.
18 months later he wounded himself with a gun, and died two days later.
a rainbow is an arc of color in the sky that you can see when the sun shines through falling rain.
in the bible, it says god made a rainbow, after he flooded out evil from the world, a promise to never harm the earth like that again.
the seven colors of the rainbow.
the cia is made up of four groups that each do different things.
their goal is to protect the us people.
some people feel that the cia does good by finding out secret information about enemies of the united states.
an earthquake-proof building is a building that has been built to survive an earthquake.
a building's strength also has to do with the material of which it is composed.
a pillow is a soft cushion that a person puts under their head when they are sleeping in a bed.
they are used very much by young children to make drawings, although some artists also use them.
self-defense means fighting off something or another person to protect yourself and maybe others.
the goal is to be the last one to be hit with the ball.
if a player is hit by the ball, he or she should go to the outside of the court to the other team.
it is thought to be good for physical education.
many school children play this game.
of the three
they wore a red and white crown, which means that they ruled both upper and lower egypt.
now the passengers of the boat have to live on the island and try to find a way home.
it is often larger than a pan, and will be taller than it is wide.
you can make white light by putting all the other colors of light together.
the money used is the euro.
using the word can cause hatred.
they are responsible for the feeding and daily care of the animals.
they answer questions about the animals and might demonstrate the feeding of the animals.
a cage is a box which is made to keep something inside of, without it being able to get out (such as an animal).
a toddler is a child between the ages of one to three years old.
his music told stories of his home and the rastafarian religion that he followed.
some songs were about religion and some songs were about politics.
he was defeated at el alamein.
a flower is a part of a plant.
the word "flower" is usually used only for the part that produces seeds.
there are many different kinds of flowers in different areas in the world.
the role of flowers is to produce seeds.
flowers have long been admired and used by humans.
most people think that flowers are beautiful.
people enjoy seeing flowers growing in gardens.
some parents name their children after a flower.
flowers can also be made into tea.
some people think that some flowers have special meanings.
poppies make people think of making people feel better after people have died.
it is the area inside a square that has each side equal to 1 kilometre (1000 metres).
this way of talking about area is often used to say how much land there is, on a farm or in a city, for example.
a judge is a man or woman who is in control of a court of law.
the way that people can become judges and what they have to do in court depends on each country.
in some countries, especially the united states, there might be a jury in the courtroom that decides if someone is guilty or not guilty of breaking a law.
a jury can also decide if someone must pay money to someone else and how much they have to pay.
if there is a jury, the judge has the job of making sure the person taken to court is treated in a fair way.
in other countries, for example in many countries in europe, the judge makes the decision of whether or not a person is guilty.
some courts will have more than one judge, for example three judges.
supreme or high court judges often wear a kind of red cloak.
a person is guilty of doing something if they have done something really bad.
length is a property of a thing that can be measured.
the length of something is the distance between two ends of the thing.
length is also a property of time.
a piece of time has a length.
john was sitting for 2 hours.
the length of time john was sitting was two hours.
is the longer side of measurement
weight is a property of matter on the earth.
things weigh different when they are at sea level and on top of a mountain.
the weight of a thing can be measured with a scale.
the weight is a number showing how much the earth pulls the matter.
the number needs a unit of measurement to be useful.
this is because weight is nothing more than a force.
a thing is true if it is correct.
a thing is true if it is a fact.
a half truth is something true mixed with something false.
saying something untrue can be called 'a lie', if the person saying it knows it is untrue.
the other such value is usually called "false".
he was brought back to appear in the final three games of jeopardy!
a better example is dry ice, which changes from a solid to a gas without being a liquid.
his father died two months before he was born, leaving his 13-year-old mother as his only parent.
henry had a claim to the throne of england, but it was not a very good one, and he had to wait a long time for a chance to take the throne.
there were also people who pretended to be long-lost members of the royal family, so that they could try to take the throne.
it was built by the romans.
it is also a large port.
of course, this cost far more than what the harvest was worth.
he might have been a king or a leader of britons.
no one knows whether he is a real person or not.
some say he is a mythical person like hercules and some say he is a real person with a miraculous story.
when he grew up, he found a sword stuck in a stone.
he was told that whoever could pull it out was the true king.
so he pulled it out and became king.
many books have been written about him.
one of best known books is written by sir thomas malory.
it stands on the river medway.
there are three sisters and one brother in the group.
it was while they were trying out for this movie that they were noticed by their manager, john hughes.
he was the older brother of moses and helped him lead their people out of egypt.
aaron is also a music band.
he did 2 months military training in the academic legion because it was compulsory, but he refused to hold or fire a weapon.
while he was young he met many jewish people who lived in that area.
he did not want to be sent to germany where he would be made to join the army.
his father died of a heart attack in 1941.
it is believed that his father had been helping jews escape from the nazis.
it was at this time that he decided that he must become a priest.
he gave her food and helped her go to the railway station.
she did not hear of him again until the day came when he was elected pope.
in 1962 he took part in the second vatican council and helped write two very important documents.
one was about religious freedom and the other one was about the work of the church in the modern world.
this means that the pope gave these people the title of "blessed".
since then it has been held in a different country every year.
it encourages young people to be faithful to god, and to live together in peace.
all these travels were paid by the money of the countries he visited and not by the vatican.
the pope wanted to bring freedom and human rights to his country.
he also went to many countries that no pope had ever visited before.
this is considered to be the largest single event in christian history.
exactly one year later he traveled to fatima to thank mary, mother of god for saving his life.
many people thought he should be given the title "blessed".
may 22 is 50 days after the death of the pope.
he was also a critic of capitalism that was not controlled and he did not want people's basic rights to be oppressed by world governments.
he was against homosexuality, and in favor of people starting families as one husband and one wife.
john paul is also remembered for his devotion to the consecrated holy communion, the holy body and blood of christ.
they decide to use these powers for good and work from their laboratory in a new york city skyscraper.
they are small and may be easy to lose.
it has a new surround sound system.
it is smaller and lighter in size and weight and also has brighter screens.
he has been in lots of movies.
it is often known as a shooting star or falling star and can be a bright light in the night sky, though most are faint.
if it hits the ground, it is then called a "meteorite" and it will leave a hole in the ground called a crater.
the word similarity means that two or more things share some property.
this means that they have some things about them that makes them alike.
he married 2 times and had 5 children, 3 who died young that left him with two sons.
after two months he went back to the show because he had paying wages to his staff (since there was no work) and could no longer pay them.
for the first week of being a separate unit, it was the province of nunavut.
it can be used for scaffolding.
the trojan war was one of the greatest wars in greek mythology.
it is said this war never happened.
they had invited almost all the gods to their wedding.
she was angry and she threw a golden apple among the guests on which was written "to the fairest".
because they could not end the fight by themselves, they went to zeus, the king of the gods.
the war went on for ten years.
the greeks won by building a big wooden horse.
some greek people hid inside the horse, and the rest put the horse on the shore and left in their boats.
they thought that the horse was a present.
when it became night, the greeks hiding inside the horse, opened the city gates and set fire to the houses.
the greeks who had left in their boats, had just pretended to leave to trick the trojans.
they had actually just hidden behind islands.
they returned and won the war.
many people of the time thought the war had really happened.
this means that the people who control the cruise can give many personal services.
these are some of the largest ships ever built.
how the program looks can also be changed with skins, and it can be made small enough to fit on the taskbar.
after crashing on the island, they are attacked by a spinosaurus, who kills several members of their party.
baader and others then spent some time in a palestinian military training camp in jordan before being thrown out.
the boys in the club kept up on the news, practiced public speaking at their clubhouse, and raised money to give to the poor.
she kissed him on the forehead.
he was so dazed that he had to stay in bed for several weeks.
then upasni told some of his followers that from then on baba would be their spiritual guide.
he started his silence in 1925.
many thousands of people came to see him.
some of them became his followers.
he showed his followers that the best path is to love god at all times by loving your fellow man.
he also said he had not come to start a new religion -- that it was better to truly follow one's own religion.
with more learning they had to start teaching new parts of these sciences.
it often went against what was already known about the world of star trek.
often "star trek" has something to do with the state of the world at the time the stories were filmed.
the planning and building of a long tunnel may take many years.
historically it was very often the church or the state who cared for orphans.
the people who run those services very often try to place the children in a family that might adopt them.
now it belongs to the northern line
because of that they built the victoria line which took over many passengers.
the system uses two kinds of trains, a big one and a small one.
these doors only open when a train stops and prevent people falling or jumping onto the tracks.
the new part is called the piccex.
after they broke up he tried out to be a drummer in a small band called nirvana.
this may explain why he wrote some of his music using different colors for different music notes.
after a pregnancy of 8 months, the female gives birth to 1 or 2 babies.
females begin to have babies when they are 2 or 3 years old.
young moose stay with their mother for a year; after one year they leave and live alone.
he was born in new york city but he has lived most of his life in britain.
he first made two small documentaries.
one of them was about a boxer and was called "day of the fight".
he did not enjoy working on it because of problems he had with the other people working on the film who controlled it.
he liked the united kingdom very much and decided to live there for the rest of his life.
his next film was one of his most famous and also his most controversial.
the author of the book stephen king hated the movie and did not like that kubrick changed many things from the book.
the film received a poor response from audiences and did not make as much money as expected.
to have something ratified, it must usually be agreed to be good and must go through a process.
some believe that if the physical constants were different, there would be no life in the universe.
for example, they control all the money that is used for making the movie.
there are a small amount of directors who are given complete control over making their movie.
sometimes they do not like to look at others while talking to them, or do not want to share interesting things with others.
they may be interested in one thing that people without autism would not think is that important.
they may look for a second at a face, but quickly turn.
they may not be interested in making friends.
this does not mean that they do not love their parents, they just do not know how to say it.
they may laugh and cry at the wrong times.
many are not good at talking with other people.
doing things over and over again.
they may also be interested in strange things and may spend all of their time learning about their interest.
it is called an inflected language - that means that the meaning of words can be changed by changing their endings.
there are very many of these endings to learn - it is a difficult part of italian.
before that it was called south west africa.
it was very expensive and was often used to make swords and knives.
in about the year 1610 steel started to be made in england, and the way it was made got better and cheaper over the next 100 years.
every material is made up of atoms which are very small parts.
there are a huge number of things that people make from steel.
it is one of the most common and useful metals.
the early years including world war i.
it was told that it could not have any military aeroplanes at all because it was blamed for starting the war in 1914.
the years between the two world wars.
the training school closed in 1933.
they were frightened by the idea of war and did not want another one.
as the war went on, things began to go badly wrong for the "luftwaffe".
nato allowed west germany to have an air force because the country was right next to east germany.
some people think that two shots were fired, and there are many stories about what really happened.
people call this the greatest conspiracy theory ever in the whole world, as there are so many different stories and so many people believe that something strange happened.
the second kind is often used to solve problems in which you have to know the value of some variables.
canteens are most used for carrying water to places where water is hard to find.
the idea of a canteen comes from ancient times when water and wine were carried in bags made from animal skins.
the food in a canteen is also usually cheaper than a restaurant.
a beadle is someone who works at a church or a jewish synagogue and helps the clergy.
a beadle's main job is to show people to their seats and to keep order during church services.
steam is the name given to water when it is a gas.
they are sometimes called counting numbers.
the cardinality of a set is the cardinal number that tells how many things are in the set.
the united states merchant marine (usmm) is a part of the military which is controlled by the government in both peace and war.
this means that anyone who knows how can download the source code and make any changes they want.
they keep working on it because they enjoy it or want to become more experienced programmers.
she is also a member of the church of scientology.
club soda is a clear drink that is sometimes used to help remove stains from clothing.
even though it has the name "ale", which can be another word for beer, it is not beer.
it can be enjoyed by all ages.
it has three doors and was first made in 1996.
the bascules are raised to allow tall ships to pass through - this happens around 900 times per year.
a number such as 5 or 200 cannot change its value.
but if a person walks away from the building, the distance variable compared to the building is increasing.
so it does not have the same value and we can not use the same number for it, as it might be 1 foot now but 2 feet in a second's time.
this created a serious problem with the u.s.
many people felt allende was the beginning of a new era in which great changes to society - especially in developing countries - could be brought about peacefully through an election
only a few authorities are based on physical power, most of them are based on an organizational authority system.
musical instruments are things used to make music.
his family was rich and well known.
he went to a famous school named harrow.
in 1911 he was made first lord of the admiralty, which made him in charge of the navy.
he joined the army and was sent to fight in france, although he was still a member of parliament.
he was not given any job in the government.
however hardly any leaders agreed with him.
some people thought that britain could not win the war, and that they should make peace with hitler.
in 1965 he died at the age of 90 with his wife lady clementine churchill and other members of the family at his bedside.
the golan heights is a strip of land that was part of syria until israel captured it in the six day war of 1967.
the united nations has voted to ask israel to pull its troops out of the golan heights.
they almost reached a peace deal but they couldn't agree on where to draw the line, and what syria would have to do in return.
a translator reads something written in one language and speaks it or writes it in another language.
in many countries (such as the united states) someone is considered an adult when he or she is older than 18 years.
but there are exceptions, like japan and south korea, which do not consirder a person to be an adult until he or she is 19 or 20 years old.
there are also some cultures that say a person is an adult from an age of 12 years on.
a colony is a place controlled by a another country.
there must be many people to start a colony.
the thunder that a storm makes is also a sonic boom caused by lightning forcing air to move faster than the speed of sound.
it is the shrine of the third highest mountain in the world i.e.
this is because it means that people have babies and make their families when they "plan" for it.
this means that babies and families do not happen by accident.
some of these have been done for a long time, but many of them were only discovered in the last seventy five years.
these can only be used by women.
implants and injections are very good for younger women or women who cannot take a pill every day.
but these risks are not as big as the risk a woman has if she gets pregnant.
the worst part about iuds is that they have to be put in by a doctor.
this is when a man or woman has surgery to make them not able to make babies.
these are not done only for contraception, but they are done for other reasons.
these have been used for a very long time.
when the woman is not fertile, she will not get pregnant when she has sex.
there are certain rules the woman can use to know if she is not fertile.
so many doctors who do abortions for women help women find a better way to not get pregnant the next time.
many more people can also understand it, but not as a first language.
free will is the theory that every person can decide what to do freely.
most people think we have free will.
but in fact there is a very hard question.
if there is free will, then even if somebody else knew everything about us, they would not be able to work out exactly what we would do.
if we work out what to do based on things we know or think, then the other person would know that too, because they know everything about us.
then they could work it out in the same way and know what we would do, and there would be no free will.
another idea is that some of the things we use when working out what to do are random.
but if what we do is based on something random, does that mean we are "free" or not?
there are also questions about what it would mean if there were no free will.
if there were no free will and somebody steals something from you, do we have to let them do so, because they could not have chosen to do anything else?
some people think that if there were no free will, we would not have to think about anything.
but those people are making a mistake.
determinism does not mean that we already know what to do so we do not have to think about it.
it means that we do think about it but that our thoughts always end up the same.
compatibilists are people who think that, even if somebody could work out everything we would do, there could still be free will as long as we are able to do things we want.
people who are not compatibilists say that this would not be free, because if someone else knew what we wanted, they would know that we would do it; also we are not free to choose what we want or like, so doing things because we want to do them does not mean we have freely chosen them.
irrigation is when people add water to plants, to help them grow when there is not enough rain.
it was the 10th largest city in the united states at the time of the 2000 census.
it was made a city in 1701.
this is because they took away extra grain produced by the workers.
this was known as grain requisitioning.
workers were not allowed to sell their extra food.
so workers didn't produce much food any more, because there was no point because no food could be given out any more because no extra was produced, russia ended up with lots of people who did not have any food.
this is because the people did not believe in war communism.
it may also send people to help make better the other country.
this is especially needed when a disaster happens in a poor country.
it can help the poor and needed by simply giving them food and water.
it is usually made with dams that block a river or collect water that is pumped there.
disadvantages are that dams can harm the land and animals around them and some people say that they just do not look good.
it was thought the vikings were the first to settle in cramlington.
until relatively recently it was made up of a few small mining villages, but was chosen to be a new town and since the 1960s, builders have enlarged the town to become the town of 40,000 it is today.
many different animals and plants live around dungeness.
certain religions say that the mind is separate from the body and is called a soul (see dualism).
others believe that the mind is just a different way of describing certain parts of the human brain.
she was in her teens when she wrote the book that is now a classic.
she was the second daughter in her family.
he was soon a leader in the group.
the government saw him as a threat to their policy of apartheid, and they made it very hard for him to keep leading.
he was put in jail for this in 1964.
he was considered one of south africa's greatest leaders of all time and is respected around the world.
to swim is to move through water.
swimmers need to be able to stay above water and sometimes be able to hold their breath for a long time.
a person needs to be healthy if it wants to do it as a sport.
he was born in the town of syracuse in sicily in what is now italy.
he was very famous during his life and he may be one of the most clever people who have ever lived.
his father was phidias, an astronomer.and he may have been in the family of a king of syracuse.
syracuse was a rich greek city, on the sea shore in sicily.
not much is known about the personal life of archimedes, for example, whether he was married or if he had children.
there are many stories told about archimedes.
the best known saying of archimedes was that if he was given a long enough lever and a place to stand, he could move the world.
this is meant to show the power of the lever.
archimedes was not the first person to use a lever, but he did write about how it worked and what could be done to make it work better.
another archimedes story is that a king thought his crown was not pure gold.
archimedes proved that the crown was made from gold mixed with silver.
the value of gold was more than that of silver, so the king was deceived.
archimedes was in a bath and thought about what happens when an item is put into water.
when he had this idea, he jumped out of the bath and ran with no clothes on through the streets of the town, shouting "eureka!"
archimedes is also well known for being the first person to understand statics, which is a part of the study of physics and is to do with loads that do not move, for example in buildings or bridges.
he also understood and wrote about what happens when things float in liquids which is called buoyancy.
he discovered, that is found out, how many things work and wrote down the new rules and laws that he found.
for example, he made a machine to lift water that could be used by farmers to bring water to their crops.
this gear would then make a small stone fall into a cup.
at the end of a journey one could count the number of stones in the cup to find the distance.
archimedes also made a machine by which one person could pull a large ship with just one rope.
this was during the punic wars, which were between rome in what is now italy and the city of carthage in what is now north africa.
it was used to defend the city from attacks by ships.
another story about archimedes is that he burned roman ships from far away using many mirrors and the light from the sun.
after many years the roman army took the city of syracuse.
one of the soldiers killed archimedes, who was then an old man.
the soldiers had perhaps been told to catch archimedes alive, so it may have been a mistake.
he was so busy with his drawing that he did not see the soldier behind him.
there are also radios that can be wound up like a toy.
a person that does this is called a "vandal".
a person wins by having the most money at the end of the game.
socks can cover only the foot and ankle, or they may be long enough to cover the entire lower leg up to the knee.
a lighthouse is a tall house that has a light placed near the top.
the lighthouse is meant to protect ships from crashing into shore by sending the light out towards the sea.
the light usually turns in a circle so that ships see a flashing light.
even today, many languages use a word that comes from the name of the island, to stand for a lighthouse.
they can also be in the form of a brown paper bag.
the object of the game is to have more money than the other players by the end of the game.
posters are made to be shown on a wall or other flat surface.
they may also be copies of famous works of art.
an eyelash is a hair that grows at the edge of the eyelids.
they protect the eye from small things like dust.
she told him to go and find a village on the banks of the vltava and to start a town there.
wenceslas was murdered by his brother when he was going to church.
he was later made a saint.
a priest called jan hus said that the catholic church had become too powerful.
a lot of people agreed with what hus had been saying.
a lot more fighting followed, and for many years bohemia was ruled by kings who lived in other countries.
the people were free to speak what they thought, and there was no more serfdom.
there was a lot of culture.
they wanted to use their own language instead of german.
there is a famous astronomical clock on the wall of the old town hall.
the great wall of china is a very old stone wall in china which was built to protect the north of the empire of china from enemy attacks.
the great wall stands 5 people wide and 10 people high.
rumours about being able to see the the great wall from the moon are untrue.
it is so wide and the flow is so strong that not a single bridge has been built over it.
what made it difficult to measure the length of the river, is that the river changes its name at some points.
there are many cities along the river.
it typically has a square bottom with four triangular sides that get narrower as they get nearer to the point at the top, called the "apex".
a pyramid that has a triangle as its base instead of a square is called a tetrahedron.
he then has many problems such as missing his own wedding and trying to save his job.
this means that it has a council of people who make decisions about some things that affect the people who live there.
tourism is the most important industry on the island, and lots of people have jobs looking after tourists so it is awfully good that a lot of people do choose to come to the island!
there is no known cause for alzheimer's disease and even though it is incurable there are medications that can be taken to relieve the patient of some of the symptoms.
she has since said she was about to leave the world of acting, possibly to become a teacher, but then the role in "evita" was offered to her.
for more than a year she played the role.
she later had another role in 2000 with the "king and i".
because of his problems with the church, he was not allowed to be buried officially.
there is only room for 10 people in it.
other people stay there to take care of sealand.
a sticky note is a small piece of paper with a strip of glue along one edge that make it "sticky," so you can stick it to things.
sometimes they will get a percentage of the money if they buy a product.
it is said to be the bar that the series creators saw and wanted to model the bar in their show after.
the ends of the staple are pointed and go into the paper.
that way the pieces of paper get stuck together.
it has been a partner of disney for many years and now is owned by the company.
he was 9 when she died.
he had a sister named saminta.
in this list, a person can find the next number by adding the last two numbers together.
he is also a famous hacker.
they played 22 games a year.
by the 1940's, they were playing 50 games a year, but this increased slowly to 80 games by the 1970's.
he later lived in the united states.
he wrote books about many subjects.
his widow did not tell anyone how he died, until years later.
in the study of life and living things, evolution is the term used to describe the way a type of living thing changes over a long period of time.
the creatures that have less than five digits often have a sign that they used to have more.
a horse has a single hoof on each foot, a cow has two, a bird has its whole arm changed into a wing, and a human has a hand.
they look different now because they changed in different ways: that is evolution.
they have happened very slowly over a long time.
the living thing also acts in a certain way; this is its behaviour.
the way that a living thing is structured, the way its body works and the way that it acts are all "traits".
the traits of a particular person are of two types, the ones that they inherit through their parents, and the ones that are caused by outside forces.
a person and their brothers and sisters are one generation.
the parents have come from the grandparents, who are a still earlier generation.
photographs of these people, all taken when each of them was the same age, would show that each family member looked a little different.
one part of evolution that explains a lot of what we see is due to natural selection.
natural selection says that since children are not exactly like their parents, some of them might have a trait that makes them better able to live where they live.
so the ones with a slight advantage are likely to have children with the same advantage, or might even end up with some children with a bigger advantage.
grandchildren are likely to be really good at living where they live.
in other words, natural selection explains why the bodies of living things look and work the way they do, and why living things act the way they do, when compared with other creatures.
forest birds have different needs to desert birds.
vultures live where there is little food.
they have to search for it over long distances.
the bird fluffs it wings out to make its body look bigger.
it is possible that everyone in a small group could end up with only one of the possibilities (like everyone in a particular town all having blue eyes).
this means that all the children of everyone in the group will have just that one possible eye colour.
this can work in the same way for other traits.
for example, a group of animals might usually eat a particular food.
that food is no longer available.
the group of animals has to eat a different food.
but the "chance differences" that have been caused by genetics may mean that they are not able to eat one possible new food, but are more able to eat another.
another group of animals might have ended up with the other possible genetic differences, and so they can eat the food that the first group cannot eat.
this can cause two groups that began the same to end up very different.
two groups that start the same can also become very different if they live in different places.
they often feed in the daytime.
their metabolic system is slow and they sleep most of the day underground.
when two groups that started the same become different enough, then they become two different species.
he could not correctly explain what made children look like their parents.
they explained that things called genes were passed from parent to child.
many creationists believe that the creation myth found in their religion goes against the idea of evolution.
but they were not actually better, so they were wrong to say this.
this would mean that those who were considered "good stock" would receive a reward if they reproduced.
they also say that it is difficult to find data that can support them.
most often these reasons are influenced by their religious beliefs.
people have found it to be useful for different kinds of research.
humans have used this for thousands of years to domesticate plants and animals.
it is played with a ball that is pointed at both ends.
at both ends of the field there are end zones.
at the ends of the field there the scoring area called the end zone.
all of the teams play 4 games before the regular season starts, and the games do not change what team gets to the post season.
each team play 16 games and has one week off.
the day of the event is commonly known nation wide as super bowl sunday.
in the end it grows up and becomes a beautiful swan.
after the next winter, the little duckling sees its mirror image in a lake: it has grown up to become a beautiful swan.
a mockery is something said about someone or something to make that person or thing look bad.
but most of the time when someone is mocking someone else, it is because they do not like that person.
a person who mocks other people might become famous because he is funny.
these people are known as comedians
it has been their home since they were created 18 years ago.
he was born in spain and grew up in mexico.
this became one of the main causes of the african slave trade.
jerusalem is a very old city.
the palace of king david and the temple of solomon were burned and the jews were captured and taken to babylon.
king herod the great, who ruled for the roman emperor, made the temple larger to try and win jewish favor.
the temple was famous for its greatness and beauty.
jesus christ died in jerusalem around ad 33.
jewish people who lived in jerusalem were caught and became slaves.
there were some jews in jerusalem all along, even though they were ruled by other people.
people started building the new city in the 1800s.
all buildings in jerusalem have special jerusalem stone on them.
a long time ago cornish was the only language spoken in cornwall, but more and more people began to speak english instead of cornish.
some people say that a woman called dolly pentreath was the last person who could speak cornish.
this is not quite true, but she was one of the last people to use it instead of english.
some people learned about cornish by travelling around talking to people who could still speak it and by reading old plays and books.
after this many people began to learn the language and speak it again.
people think there are probably about 3000 to 5000 people who speak cornish.
some young people have grown up speaking it.
in a hundred years the cornish language has grown from almost no speakers to many thousands which is very exciting for many people.
one problem with cornish is that there are three different dictionaries with different spellings and people do not agree about how to write the words, or how to say them.
this can be confusing for people when they have not been speaking long, but people learn how to read the different spellings and they are still very similar.
where the first crime took place.
the band decided not to continue after his death out of respect and because they believed that nobody could take his place.
most companies who sell their software for money make it closed source to make it harder for people to copy it for free.
many can be put on keyrings.
in the united kingdom the government lost some important data while transferring it on a flash drive.
some usb flash drives have a light that blinks to show if it is being used by the computer.
they are part of the order struthioniformes.
in the wild the female takes care of the eggs during the day and the male takes care of the eggs during the night.
an adult human can stand on the egg without breaking it.
it is sometimes said that ostriches will hide their heads in the ground when they are scared, but this is not true.
their teeth are constantly replaced throughout their lives.
they are very good at feeling vibrations in the
vultures use their large wings to soar in the air for many miles without having to flap.
both have heads and necks with no feathers.
egyptian vultures use rocks to open eggs they pick up a rock with there beak and simply drop or throw they rock onto the egg and breaks it.
the golden eagle is found over most of the world and it usually eats small mammals.
it is the only eagle in the world ever to have been top predator of its ecosystem.
they usually have pointed wings and long tails.
it is a fashionable area and has with large well-built houses and is close to the city of london.
almost all of them live in japan, but they have their own culture and language that is different from the japanese.
the poem starts with the god apollo having sent a plague to the greeks, because they captured the daughter of one of his priests.
taking too much of a drug can cause sickness or even death.
it is very important to keep taking the drug until the doctor says to stop because someone can feel better and still be sick.
some of the earlier band members also created stage names by taking the first name of a female sex symbol and the last name of a serial killer.
they also had to find a real drummer.
the next morning polyphemus lets his sheep out of the cave, but touches their backs so no one of the men could ride out on them.
but then the god hermes came and told her that the gods said that she had to let odysseus go.
he goes to his home and meets his son telemachus.
but the goddess athena makes them stop and give up the fight.
kimchi can be stored for a long time and it will not go bad.
some must be stored for over a year to be finished.
course rock salt is then rubbed in between the leaves of the cabbage.
it is also quite common for these pots to be buried under ground.
kimchi can be kept for a long time and will not go bad.
it is a black granite wall which has the names of every american killed in the war.
the samurai need to protect a town from thiefs, but they each do it for a different reason.
she had just been released from jail a month before his birth.
for several thousand years the baltic sea has connected the countries at her shores.
they belong to the same group of languages as german and english.
all three countries still have their own currency, which in all the countries are called "krone" or "krona".
sometimes people also call this matrimony.
the fact of being married is called wedlock.
the ceremony is usually called wedding.
the most common form of marriage is that between a man and a woman.
other countries that allow them sometimes have a different name for them.
usually there is also a spiritual part of marriage.
those marrying also have to be of a certain age to be able to marry.
if that age is not specified it is usually the age of consent.
the man getting married is called the groom, and the woman getting married is called the bride.
only boys can go to this school.
but the struggle for a free island still goes on as it can be seen on this page
it has a small and rich economy.
the country makes a lot of money by selling oil.
this money is almost half of all the money the country makes.
the oil money is also 95% of the money made by selling things to different countries (people call that exports).
kuwait is one of the few nations that has education for every age.
people who travel for fun are called "tourists".
places that a lot of people visit are called "resorts".
it is to the west of london.
close to seventy thousand people live on the island.
in most games the ace is the highest value, but in some games it is the lowest.
what was left looks like to be a sword, thus making the king the look like he is stabbing himself in the head.
an emperor is a male who rules an empire.
an emperor usually comes to power when one of his parents dies.
the wife of an emperor is called an empress.
a woman who comes to power in an empire is also called an empress.
the only emperor in the world today is the ruler of japan.
it is separated from it by a mountain range called the san gabriel mountains that are over 40 miles wide and almost 2 miles high overall.
astrophysics is also the study of how the universe started and how it is changing with time.
a long time ago, during the time of the ancient greeks, people thought that the way things worked in the sky was different to the way things worked on earth.
they also thought that they could not study how things in the sky worked.
this was because they could not do experiments with things in the sky, but they could do experiments with things that are on the surface of the earth.
by this, he meant that we can study how things work on this planet to find out how things work in space.
later scientists found that by looking at the light from stars they were able to work out what they were made from.
word order is a part of grammar.
it has to do with the order words are in a sentence.
the word order is often different between languages.
the person who won was bill clinton.
if two trains are moving at the same speed in the same direction, then a passenger in either car will not be able to notice that either train is moving.
another thing, if one stands on the earth one will not be able to see that it is moving.
this is the law of inertia: a body at rest continues at rest and a body in motion continues in motion in a straight line unless influenced by an external force.
system moving according to the law of
the laws of nature obey the same general
if the earth was moving toward a star, the starlight from it should have been reaching the earth a little faster than normal.
not only was it off, but it was off by exactly the right amount to make the speed of light seem to be moving at its regular speed.
to be more explicit, let us specify that the time of an event is given by the time that it is observed minus that distance to the event divided by "c".
it is a kind of animal known as a marsupial because it has a pouch on its stomach.
when its young are born they spend some time growing in their mother's pouch before going into the world.
they are nocturnal which means they sleep in the day and come out at night.
they can weigh from 30 to 70 pounds.
the name of that country stuck as the name of the bird.
although this part of the country is very high with lots of mountains, there are also parts of bolivia which are very flat, and parts of the country which are very near sea level.
there is also a bit of bolivia covered by the amazon rainforest, and a big lake which is the highest lake in the world.
this lake is called lake titicaca.
some parts of the bridge are still the same as they were in 1944.
he was later made a cardinal
the law that describes how strongly charges pull and push on each other is called coulomb's law.
if a person gets a positive or negative charge, it may make the person's hairs stand up because the charges in each hair push it away from the others.
there were many fights between artists from the west coast and the east coast.
at the time of the roman empire, there was a city here called scarbantia.
but the people of the city opened the gates when the army of king ladislaus iv of hungary arrived.
the socialist government took away a lot of the freedom that people had.
this was the beginning of a big change for all the socialist countries of europe.
people who had not been allowed to travel or live in other countries were finally allowed to be free.
the city of sopron shows signs of its long history in its buildings.
there are still walls and foundations from the ancient roman times and also building from the middle ages.
there is also a very old jewish synagogue.
this is because bremen used to be in the "hanseatic league" which was a group of cities which did a lot of trading.
there are two cities that make up bremen.
the city covers an area of.
stars can change very much between when they are first created and when they run out of energy.
a star starts its life as a cloud of dust and gas called a nebula.
parts of this information that tell how to make one small part or characteristic of the living thing - red hair, or blue eyes, or a tendency to be tall - are known as genes.
every cell in the same living thing has the same dna, but only some of it is used in each cell.
a living thing has two copies of each gene, one from its mother, and one from its father.
since a living thing has two copies of each gene, it can have two different alleles of it at the same time.
in other cases, you end up with something in between the two possibilities.
supply is the amount that is available of something based on a price.
in economics, the law of supply and demand will decide the price at which something will be bought and sold.
demand is how much is bought of something based on a price.
in economics, the law of supply and demand will decide the price at which something will be bought and sold.
sometimes the demand doesn't change much no matter what the price is.
these people need to get their drugs, they will pay any price they can afford.
a bank transaction is when money is taken out of or put into a bank
there have been versions of it that are for children as well.
many people consider it to be the best encyclopedia, because it is accurate and has lots of detail.
there are books of the year.
although some of the people who helped write the britannica helped because they were friends of the most important editors, many other people wanted to help the britannica because it was becoming very successful.
these people came from many other countries, and some of them were very famous for the things they wrote about.
people need to pay to use the website.
they can grow in many places, as long as it is not too cold.
many other foods are also made from avocado.
many animals will get very sick or die if they eat avocado.
they try to win the stanley cup at the end of the year.
the uk government is going to build many more houses in the town and will double its population in a few years.
a song is a piece of music which contains words.
songs can be made in many ways.
some people form bands which write and record songs to make money from it.
some people also make parodies of songs, which is usually changing the words of the song but keeping the tune.
the word "song" is often used to describe any piece of music, even one without words or lyrics.
the proper word for a piece of music without words is "instrumental".
sometimes she helps him with his books.
sometimes it is hard to tell which parts of his books are real, and which are not.
this makes many people talk about his books and try to understand them.
many people live and work in penzance.
these peoples later became known as the "english".
the tonight show
at that place, he was shown to be smarter than other people that were as old as him.
after that job, he started to work as a manager of a factory.
at that time, he made many new ideas about chemicals and things that helped with those ideas.
the book helped other people to learn the words he had made.
he learned a lot of other languages.
this book was written by l.l.
zamenhof, a person who wanted to make an easy language that everyone could learn.
they spoke to each other in esperanto.
he thought that this was much more true with esperanto.
he taught people a lot about esperanto.
he wrote something showing that esperanto was good for learning other languages.
people did not know this at that time.
world war i made his family have to leave poland.
it should never be touched, for it may burn anything that gets too close.
but fire can be very useful if it is treated carefully.
it has always been very important for people to be able to make fire, because people need its heat on cold days, or its light in darkness, as well as for cooking.
a fire can be stopped by starving it of its fuels.
they are words written in latin.
these doctors may only treat injuries to a certain part of the body, or only treat patients who have certain diseases, for example there are doctors who specialise in diseases of the stomach or intestines.
other doctors are "general practitioners" or "family practitioners", meaning that they do a little bit of everything and try to deal with as much of a patient's health problems as they can without sending them to a specialist.
he based it on a movie with the same title that he wrote.
she is always the one that needs to be saved.
she is often the first one to die.
he changed that girl into the person with all the power.
he changed her into the hero.
that girl gets all of the powers of the slayer.
the curse would make him lose his soul and become evil again if he became really happy.
the curse took his soul away when they had sexual intercourse for the first time.
this caused angel to become evil.
when angel got back his soul, he knew that he and buffy could not be together because he might lose it again.
she is blonde and beautiful and she is a normal cheerleading girl at the start of the movie.
she also had greater intuition, and some ability of clairvoyance, usually in the form of dreams that tell the future.
there have also been magical times that she died in, but these periods of time were stopped and do not affect normal times.
the first time she died, she drowned and was brought back to life with cpr.
the second time, magic was used to bring her back to life.
she was very smart and good with computers.
she found out that she is very good at magic and became a powerful witch.
it was said many times during the series that xander was the person in the group who had no special powers at all, but still fought as much as everyone else.
at first, dawn had the special ability to open the way to a hell dimension.
she could have made a very good watcher.
as a vengeance demon, she would use magic to give a wish to a woman who had been treated wrong by a man.
this caused him to have to feel all the pain he had caused.
he stopped killing people to drink their blood because with a soul he knew it was wrong.
he lived a very poor life drinking the blood of rats until a messenger from the powers that be took him to california to show him buffy.
he fell in love with her and changed his life so he could help her.
buffy fell in love with angel but he turned evil after she gave him one true moment of happiness(after they had sex).
she would help buffy every now and then, but most often was the one that needed help.
he fought a demon to get his soul back and helped save the world in the last episode.
he had increased strength and endurance, but he was not as strong as buffy.
but when she got to his helicopter they had already taken off and he didnt see her.
faith tried to fight evil, but later chose to be evil instead.
if he was not put into a cage or locked up, he would roam sunnydale from the time the sun set until it came up again in the morning.
these are often found in the writing done for "buffy".
they do this by biting people or animals on the neck with their two long fangs.
people who are killed by having their blood drank by vampires may also become vampires.
this does not account for them getting out of ditches and graves over weeks or months.
some parts of the blood can not be made in sufficient quantities.
as well as the fact that drinking blood has always been believed to give you the strength of the one you drink from.
some of them may also drink blood.
a degree is a document that a student receives when they graduate from a school to show that they completed all their classes.
this is also called a diploma.
some middle schools have also started to do this to make students feel like they have accomplished more.
in the united states, a high school is a school that students go to usually for grades 9 through 12.
it is the last school that a student will go to before college.
it is also the last school that the law requires the student to go to.
in the united kingdom, the last school that the law requires the student to go to is called a secondary school.
they are usually paid for through property taxes that are applied to everyone who owns property in the school district.
state now guarantees free public schools.
one solution has been to give "vouchers" to parents that help them send their children to private schools.
for that reason, most of these schools take some or all of their students as "boarders" - that is, they live at the school and not at home.
a welfare state is where the government has a duty to provide some level of basic support for its citizens.
the state give money to people who do not have any money.
the state gives homes to people who do not have them.
to make this happen there must be high taxes.
usually rich people have to pay most taxes.
this adds to a charge of +1.
disney wanted to build a place that had all of the fun of the traveling fairs where parents and children could ride together.
he asked them to find a place that would be a good place to build his park.
he was sure that his dream would be a good one.
after selling land that he loved very much in palm springs to help pay for the park, the building of disneyland began in 1954.
many things went wrong that day.
they stepped out of their shoes.
even the running water was a problem.
disneyland may have had problems when it opened, but it was not long before it became a success.
a ceremony was held that morning with very important people speaking to the audience.
each land has its own theme.
this is a list of those lands and some of the things in them.
it looks like america's deep south of more than 100 years ago.
superhuman means something that is beyond what people are naturally able to do.
the word "superhuman" may also mean something that is not human but can do something that humans cannot, like a robot that can think faster than a person can.
the club was blessed by the king of spain in 1920.
even though many people claim to have seen a bigfoot, or seen their tracks, no one has ever captured one, or found a dead body.
it was named this because the last names of the men who took the film were patterson and gimlin.
the book is very famous and has been read by many people all over the world.
as of 2006, over 60 million people had bought copies, which makes this book one of the most famous books in the world.
there are many things in the book that are hard to understand, and it is hard to tell which parts of the book are about real things, and which parts are not true.
the papers were written to show that the man who wrote them was really the true king of france and head of an ancient secret society.
more and more houses are built every year.
but when they fly over our city, they see that our big roads look like a net or a grid.
nobody lives right next to the big roads, so there are no trucks going past the front door of people who live there.
people do not have to cross a busy road to get from one grid square to the next one, because the roads go over bridges and people can cross safely under them.
the paths that go under the roads and between the houses are called redways because they are red in color.
only people on bicycles and people walking are allowed to use them.
so people could cycle all the way across the city and never have to go on a busy road.
what was it like before the builders came?
before the builders came, there were many fields and a lot of villages.
people can still see the old villages because the houses look different.
there are no houses on the fields beside the rivers.
when the builders dug up the ground to build on, they found some strange things.
they also found a roman farm - people can still see bits of it because they decided to leave it alone.
they also found some buried treasure and gave it to the museum.
people who are not from milton keynes decided that it must mean that everywhere is covered in concrete and that we would forget what a cow looks like.
we have birds and small animals.
there is actually more wild life in the city than there is outside it!
it takes less than an hour to get here in the train from london, maybe half an hour if they take an express train.
they also must understand how the sea works.
the study of how the sea works is oceanography.
a hospital is a place a person goes to be healed when he or she is sick or injured.
a nose is a body part which allows animals to smell things.
it has parts that make it work and send messages to the brain.
a lot of people like to pick their nose.nose-picking is a very common habit.
love is a very strong feeling of affection.
love is not easily described, because it is a mix of emotions; people can love and be loved in different ways.
different people can feel or experience love in different ways, so it is hard to define love.
being in-love is something which many people believe is too much; people think about the person or thing they are in love with a lot, the person might think that the one he/she is "in love" with is very important to them.
respect must be present in order for love to grow.
people say or describe that the person they loved first as their first love.
nick penn is the best no home
pornography is about sex in a way that makes it more important than other things (such as love, or caring or making good relationships).
pornography often shows a person who is being treated in a sexual manner without respect or love.
the word was first used for stories that were written about sex.
there are different ideas about what is and what is not pornography.
there is not often a clear difference between "erotica" and "pornography," and the argument over what is or is not pornography can even go to the courts.
some people believe that anything that shows a naked body is a type of pornography.
the laws of the united states and many other countries do not support this.
there are different kinds of pornography.
some pornography show sexual acts which most women would not wish to do.
in most countries there is a legal age under which people are considered children by the law.
there are laws to protect children against people who "exploit" them in this way.
there are many different kinds of businesses that make and sell pornography.
this is because most people think only adults should see pornography, and that it is not good for children to see it.
in some countries it is a crime to sell or show pornography to children.
some psychologists who have talked with many people who are in jail for violent sex crimes, believe that pornography that shows violent sex often makes people less caring about the feelings of other people, and more likely to commit rape and other sex crimes.
many parents do not wish their children to see pornography.
they also may feel ashamed because they wear less things than is usual for them.
in this pose, there are no things covering parts of the body.
this is often done by putting an object somewhere.
they may have rules or laws about what they think is nudity, and where they allow it.
the amount of clothing needed to remove that feeling is different for each cultures.
others do not wear any clothes below the waist.
this makes it possible for young men to see women and girls whom they may marry.
many people did not like this.
very often, (functional) nudity in front of people of the same sex is less of a problem than being nude in a group of people of both sexes, or in a group where there are only people of the other sex.
functional nudity in front of people of the same sex is still considered a bad thing in some cultures.
toplessness is a word that means that women do not cover their breasts.
in europe, women can usually do this on the beach or near it.
the face of the woman is not visible.
some people also photographed nude people because they thought the human body was something beautiful to show.
only after adam and eve have eaten from the tree of knowledge do they become aware of their nudity, and start to feel ashamed.
because of this, they are later chased away from the garden of eden.
it is not seen as a result of breaking rules, and accepted.
feelings like shame were also seen as bad.
there was nothing wrong with being naked.
the only place were women were allowed to do sports was sparta.
they were also naked while doing sports.
romans also tell us that some of them fought the romans in the nude.
part of this lifestyle is that they wear little or no clothes.
when the difference between the sexes is shown in the main stream media of these cultures this is often seen as sexually related.
at that time, women were not allowed to take part or in the games or watch them.
people suffering from being exposed too little to the sun will also be so if they are clothed.
these can be bad for health.
one example that nudity was used as a form of protest, even in the middle ages is the story of lady godiva.
the more it is used however, the less it will act on people.
at some point it will have become normal.
most children do not develop a feeling of shame until they are about 5 years old.
for this reason there have been discussions.
incidents such as this one sent a strong message to the community.
people cannot agree if parents should appear naked in front of their children.
in their opinion, doing so may provide an opportunity for parents to give important information.
many countries have made laws that should protect children from seeing sex scenes by accident.
sometimes the nudity of children in front of other children has been an issue.
this fact has been used both as a means of torture and as a punishment.
it was believed that the devil left this mark as part of the pact the witch had with him.
nakedness can also be part of a punishment or a public humiliation.
a kingdom is a country with a king or queen.
some say, he stuck them onto the door of the church of wittenberg, but others say this is not true.
the certificate can be given to people for finishing training, good working skills, or to thank someone who has done good things.
they would send ships out onto these rivers to stop anybody who was traveling through who didn't know better and collect a tax from them on any money or goods on these ships.
they were not allowed to collect these taxes.
it was only the holy roman emperor who could decide what taxes to be charged, how much and who could charge it.
the rivers provided plenty of water for the grapes in the winery, allowed easy transportation of goods, carried off wastes and trash, and kept a heavy mist over the river and the fields, which was cool and kept the sun out.
the sun was bad for the grapes, so it was good to keep it out.
once the grapes ripened and were picked, they were placed in a large vat, where workers would jump in and crush them with their feet.
the sugar we add to food usually comes from a plant called sugarcane.
when we eat regular sugar, our body breaks it apart into the smaller sugars.
when we eat starch, our body breaks it apart into smaller sugars.
when you hold a food with starch in your mouth for a few minutes, it starts to taste sweet.
it lies about 60 miles from london.
while morally wrong, these dogs were trained to run under enemy tanks.
second language is a word given to a language that a person learns in addition to their first language.
at school or in a family.
it is possible that a person speaks two or more second languages.
ido was made by a group of people that thought esperanto was too hard to be a world language.
they did not like how esperanto used letters with special marks over them, because that made it hard to type, and they thought that a world language should be easy to learn, and to write.
a root word has a root and an ending.
the speaker can take the root and put it on another word to make a new one.
also, most languages have two ways of saying "you" so they decided to have two ways of saying you.
people who know ido come together for a few days every year to meet each other and speak the language.
a paragraph is a group of words put together to form a group that is usually longer than a sentence.
this makes it easier to tell where one paragraph ends and another begins.
people start a new paragraph when they begin to either talk or write about a different topic or idea.
it is about 1 to 2 hours west of detroit.it lies in the center of the lower peninsula of michigan.
a fact is something that is true or real, or something that can be shown to be true or real.
a fact is not the same as an opinion.
the person who did the crime is the culprit.
they are not allowed to throw it, but instead they push the ball out into the air.
they "put" the ball by holding it at the their neck and pushing it through the air.
the object of the sport is to throw it as far as possible.
hitchhiking is a way that people can travel from one place to another.
this is a sign that he or she wants a car to stop and pick him/her up.
the distance traveled by hitchhiking can be anywhere from walking distance to across a continent.
it is not a good way to travel, as it can be very dangerous.
there are about 200 kinds of owls.
this is because their eyes both face forward which gives then a human expression.
every living thing has adaptations that help it succeed in its environment.
an owl can see something in front of it with both eyes at once.
if an animal can see something with both eyes at once, it can tell how far away the thing is.
that means the owl can turn its head and look anywhere with both eyes.
an owl can hear a small animal moving in leaves or grass.
they have sharp beaks to help them tear their food to pieces.
may 1 is known in many countries as may day or international labor day.
she is a living legend who has been performing for over 50 years all over the world.
there are many kinds of swords.
a "broadsword" is a long sword that is sharp on both sides and at the tip.
moses was a leader in the bible and is also important to the jewish religion.
he later led the israelites out of egypt to the land promised to them by god.
moses was born of the levi tribe.
although his mother had him, she is scared because the pharaoh wanted to kill every male israelite son in egypt.
a princess of the pharaoh saw him and decided to bring him up.
moses had to run to the land of midian.
a priest called jethro there gave him a place to stay and gave his daughter to him as a wife too.
moses had a son called gershom.
god commanded him to be a leader for the israelites and bring them out of egypt.
at first moses did not want to do it and said that he was not good with words, but god commanded him and gave aaron, his brother, to speak for him.
moses return to egypt and told the elders what happened.
he brought his family along with him back to egypt.
moses then went to the pharaoh and asked him to let the israelites go.
finally he sent ten plagues on the egyptians.
the last plague is the killing of all first-born, both human and animals.
finally the pharaoh decide to let the israelites go.
the israelites go in great numbers.
but later god made the pharaoh changed his mind and he came down with an army to attack them.
god made moses part the red sea with his staff.
when moses came to mount sinai, he went up to receive the ten commandments and other laws from god.
the ten commandments were written by god on two tablets.
moses was up the mountain for forty days and forty nights.
when the people waited for moses and did not find him, they made aaron, his brother, make a calf out of gold and worshiped it.
god warned moses about it, and when moses came down and saw what they did, he was so angry that the tablets fell and they smashed into pieces.
the people of levi tribes are commanded to kill people who worshiped the calf.
later on moses asked god to forgive the people.
god wrote for moses two more tablets, and put them in the ark.
god instructed moses to send twelve spies to scout the land god is giving to them; however some of them became afraid because the people living there looked stronger and more powerful than they.
they told the others not to go there.
god decided because of this that the israelites would wander forty years in the wilderness, and every one except joshua and caleb from that generation would die without seeing the promised land.
god gave many laws to the israelites through moses.
moses made joshua take over him before he died.
moses died before he reached canaan, the land god was leading his people to.
he was 120 years old when he died.
today jews around the world follow the laws of the ten commandments and the torah that god gave to them through moses.
he is also believed to be a prophet by muslims.
other people also have written about moses.
it is not know how much these descriptions have taken from earlier sources, that may now have been lost.
it looks like the story written about moses in the bible has two different sources.
there were two groups of people who told the story.
the two stories were passed on separately.
some people added things to the story when they told it.
canaan was an ancient country, and the land promised to abraham and his children by god in the bible.
it covers most of the area that is now palestine and lebanon.
prophets are people who are talked to by the divine.
they freely teach about what they heard and saw.
in biblical times, god sent prophets to warn the jews something bad will happen if they did not stop.
prophets usually teach people how to act.
that is high enough for snow to fall on it, even though it is near the equator (a very warm part of the world).
if the volcano erupted, it would be very bad for the people living around it because of the destruction and damage it could cause.
it usually refers to a member of one of the twelve tribes of israel.
israelites lived in the kingdom of israel, near where the country of israel is now.
israel split off from a kingdom called judah, whose members were called jews, but were still israelites.
it is known as an island of a thousand temples.
bali is also known for its folk music which is played on a group of instruments called a gamelan.
he thought a lot about what a king or prince should do to make a strong government.
in the book, he said the ruler had to get a lot of power.
but other things he said sounded very wise.
so people read the book and talk about it, to see what things are true and false.
it belongs to a family of animals called the felidae.
they have blue or green eyes.
they can grow to be long and weigh as much as 500kg (1100lbs).
they also like to live under bushes and where there is plenty of food for them to hunt and places for them to hide.
some tigers may eat up to 50 pounds of meat a day.
but there can be a lot of differences in the different leopard subspecies.
the leopard lives in the largest range of all big cats, and because of this it has a lot of different subspecies.
it can climb very well, and it stays up in trees a lot of its time.
they only come together to mate.
they are big and heavy and also very strong.
but often if you look closely you can still see the spots.
it then takes the prey to a safe place and eats it.
after a pregnancy of about a hundred days the female gives birth to usually 1 - 4 babies.
on their face, they have a black line that goes from each eye to their mouth.
they are weaker than other big cats and animals that live in the same area.
they also eat small mammals and birds if they are very hungry.
after a pregnancy of about 95 days the female gives birth to usually 1 - 3 babies.
you may hear other names, when it has colors or looks different.
that album is important to the history of the group, telling of the distance they put between them and their public, as well as being the last album they all worked on before splitting up.
when he was elected as pope, he chose the name john paul i to honor the two popes who served before he did.
john paul i was the first pope to have two names as a pope.
this is because there were several large groups in the college of cardinals who wanted to elect different people to be the pope.
luciani was elected because he was someone that all the groups agreed would make a good pope.
in one famous picture of him taken when he was elected, his hair is messy.
he did not have his hair cut before the election because he did not think he had a chance of becoming the pope.
john paul i did not want to do this.
he was known to be very friendly.
he spoke in a way that was easy for many people to understand.
no one expected the pope to die so soon after being elected.
march 19 is usually the last day of the winter season in the northern hemisphere, and the last day of the summer season in the southern hemisphere.
the word transgender is used to include many groups of people who share one important "trait" (a way of feeling or behaving) but may not be the same in other ways.
sometimes the word "transgender" is also used by people who prefer it to the word "transsexual".
this person has chosen to dress as a female, but she shows by the sign on her hand that she has xy chromosomes.
this means she was born with male gender.
these definitions are important to help understand that what people look like outside (sex) is not always the same as how they feel inside (gender.)
all of these people were and are accepted in their society and many have special roles in their society.
in many places the fight for transgender rights is associated with the fight for homosexual and bisexual rights.
they may see transgender people as strange or bad and worry that the rest of society will see homosexuals in that same way if transgender people are included in lgbt.
transgender people who wish to take medicine and have surgery to change their bodies face several problems.
in order to change their bodies, they must have doctors who are willing to help them and make the changes.
they sometimes cannot do this because doctors will not help them.
they may also not be able to do this because even if a doctor would treat them, they may not be able to afford the medicine or surgery.
to be seen and treated as the sex they wish, transgender people usually have to change their first name.
for example, a transgender woman may wish to change her birth certificate or driving license to say her new female name and to say that she is a female.
these changes can also be necessary for transgender people to be allowed to marry their spouses in places where it is illegal for homosexual people to marry.
recently the united kingdom passed the.
this act allows people to have their change of sex officially recognized.
because of the use of time zones and daylight saving time, the highest point of the sun and a clock time of noon are usually different.
the 24-hour clock is a method of telling the time in which the day runs from midnight to midnight and is divided into 24 hours, numbered from 0 to 24.
the army prefers not to use 24:00 - they do not like to have two names for the same thing so they always say "23:59", which is one minute before midnight.
this war was fought in part because a lot of people wanted cuba to become independent, and also because many americans wanted their country to get a colonial empire.
the war was won by the united states and they soon began to occupy and take control of these colonies after spain surrendered.
some diseases are caused by infection.
this is a very short list.
some diseases can be passed from one person to another easily.
they may also give the person their disease if they cough on them.
so it is important to avoid getting these diseases.
some diseases can be prevented by immunizations.
this is usually done before the person gets the disease.
in some cases, if all of the disease can be removed from society, we can get rid of the disease completely.
an example of this is smallpox.
fishing is getting fish either for fun or for the sake of having fish to eat.
fishing is done in any body of water,by boat or from the shore.
fishing for money is a very dangerous job, because people can die, but much money can be made in the process.
fishing gives a lot of food to many countries around the world, but those who take it as a job must often find fish far into the ocean under bad conditions.
ways to fish for money have become very simple using large nets and machines to catch fish.
many countries have made rules limiting how much fish people can catch.
fishing for fun is normally done with a fishing rod and line with any number of things to get the fish.
however some kinds of fish can be taken with nets for bait and a few for food.
the practice is however disputed as it by some is considered unethical to perform painful actions to the fish for fun and not for the reason of food production.
it is one of the official languages of fiji.
but no one has ever found it yet.
an apostrophe takes the place of the letter that was in the words.
different countries have different laws about people who are born on february 29.
these five books are the beginning of both jewish and christian holy writings.
some people may use the word torah as a name for all the main jewish teachings.
each of the books in the torah are separated into parts called "parshiyot"."
it usually has a lot of plants and animals.
how to say things in welsh.
here are some things to say in welsh.
one trick is to blend it in with the word before it.
the two or three letters of the car registration plate are in "italics"
it has a king as a head of state.
he has been the head of state for longer than other heads of state (kings) today.
ayuthaya existed for more than 400 years before its fall by the attack of a burmese kingdom.
the water in the cave was bad, so the cave closed in the 1880s, and in the 1930s it was filled with stone.
making hoboken better was done in the same way as in the manhattan.
there are 15 people trying to be in the council with the people who want to be mayor, and 2 trying to be in the council alone.
please note that while all of the information below is true, it may be too difficult to read."
control of the waterfront was returned to the city in the early 1950s.
it is the way the plant protects itself.
it makes a person feel more awake and alert.
that did not last because people were using too much.
it is the third largest city in the united states, although it used to be the second largest.
for many years, michael jordan played for the bulls and he helped them win six championships during the 1990s.
many people and things travel through chicago to get to other places.
the world saw him as a peacemaker.
he wanted world war i to be the biggest war ever fought.
with this, he thought he could bring an end to war forever.
he is an alien, but his race and where he is from are never said.
he speaks the same language as everyone else but uses the wrong grammar in sentences.
even though he is very small, he is very good with a lightsaber and hard to beat in combat.
it is the largest of the seven and was also the largest of the former trucial states.
the rolling stones
they are considered to be one of the most influential and greatest bands of all time.
it was quite successful and helped to bring back some of their past glory.
it can also be written as kg·m2·s−3.
it is the third biggest city in the state of rhineland-palatinate and one of its main centres.
in the system of greek numerals, it has a value of 4.
letters that came from it include the roman d and cyrillic д.
then it goes through much of germany and finally it flows into the north sea.
smaller ships can go up to ulm.
suicide is when a person chooses to kill his or her self.
this is especially important if the person already has a means of killing themselves or can get one easily.
although it is not looked at as being a good thing because they believe it will only mean you are reincarnated in the next life with a less enlightened soul, many people in the religions are actually more likely to commit suicide due to the fact that they do believe that there will at least be a next life.
it has been a juncture between the latin and greek parts of the roman empire.
this is because 1976 is two hundred years after the country was started in 1776.
the cloth can be used to make clothes for people and many other things.
he is now thinking about what to do next.
the rumor that he will retire may or may not be true, but it was denied by eminem, who said that he is just taking time out to see what he wants to do next.
there are many different kinds of these sausages.
all are special in their own way.
sometimes people have sex just for the fun, rather than to have children.
sexual intercourse is the natural and most common way to make a baby.
if a man and a woman do not want a baby, they may use contraception, which is something that stops a baby from being made.
who people like to have sex with depends on their sexuality.
men who like to have sex only with men are called homosexual or "gay".
women who like to have sex only with women are also called homosexuals, but are also called "lesbians".
some people like to have sex with both men and women.
some diseases can be spread by sex or in other ways.
there are many other kinds of sex.
these were sacrificial buildings, used to kill and sacrifice human blood in order to 'feed' their gods.
the aztecs believed that if they did not feed their gods blood, the gods would wither and die, causing the end of the world as they knew it (apocalypse).
this property usually applies to the family groups 1 to 12 on the modern periodic table of elements.
this meaning is more common now.
in this case it is also people who suffer the same kinds of discrimination.
people who prefer partners of the opposite sex usually call themselves straight instead of saying they are heterosexual.
so it could be a way of talking about being gay without saying you were homosexual.
sometimes people also use this to mean something is very colorful or gaudy.
it lies on the east bank of the river rhine.
kaiserswerth is the first part of the city to be mentioned in writing.
), and is better known today for his occult books and papers.
in his three years at cambridge, his father passed away and left him a large sum of money.
his father was a village schoolteacher.
he trained to be a teacher and was sent to work in a military hospital near where the army was.
his father died fighting in the war.
he was thinking of becoming a writer.
during the 1960s he bought land in the country near cologne and had a house built there.
he thought that electronic music was going to be the music of the future.
the music is written on a huge sheet of paper and the pianist decides as he plays which part of the music to go to next and how to play it.
this means using electronics to change the sound of normal instruments that are amplified.
this was because they had some arguments about what was more important in psychology.
the work he did was important for measuring what kind of personality people have.
he is also famous because of his ideas about the ancients - people from many years ago.
this is very hard to do.
this means he can be hard to understand.
poe did not enjoy his time at west point and decided to get himself expelled in march 1831.
he sold his first short story in 1832.
his writing did not earn very much money.
people had an ac adapter that they could plug in instead of having to buy new batteries.
people were able to buy it in japan on 21 march 2001.
first it has a "clamshell" design, which means that it can be folded up to make it smaller.
a dragon is not a true animal, but an animal found in stories told a very long time ago.
it means power and that good things will happen.
with the help of the british in world war two, he was able to return to ethiopia in 1941.
ethiopia is a country in the horn of africa.
it has one of the most well known histories as a country in africa and the world.
ethiopia used to be called abyssinia.
he is most famous as a member of the beatles.
it was started in around 1290.
the king gave the new city the name christiania, which was later also written as kristiania.
in 1925 the name of the city was changed back to oslo.
rosalyn was known to have a habit of sending him to bed at 6:30 which he goes against and only makes more trouble.
these calls are often cut short by calvin.
often they would try to bribe calvin to come under the bed by giving him a new toy or by urging hobbes to push calvin over in return for a fresh piece of salmon.
so her name and the island where she lived make people think about women who love women.
this is when sperm from a donor male is placed in a woman to make a pregnancy.
some lesbian women do this at home with a friend they choose to be the donor.
sometimes this is done with the donor known and even chosen by the couple.
this means they do not have the legal benefits and protection of marriage.
his father wanted him to be a jockey, but he wanted to be a performer.
he is most famous as a member of the monkees.
he was also the first englishman to sail all the way around the world.
sir francis drake was the second man to sail around the whole world with two of his ships intact
house of commons of the united kingdom
other countries also have parts of parliament called the house of commons which work in the same way.
when all the parties get together, the party which has the most members is the government and runs the country.
even though he has 755 home runs in his career, he never hit 50 or more in a season.
money laundering is something some criminals do to the money they make from crime.
when a criminal does money laundering, the criminal tries to make it hard for the police to find out where the criminal got the money.
if a criminal buys and sells things many times it is hard for the police to find out where the criminal got the money.
in 1989, some countries set up a group of people from different governments to tell countries the best ways to stop money laundering.
he was the most important god out of all twelve olympians.
whenever zeus was in a bad mood, he would throw thunder bolts.
they are created by other users.
there is a search box in firefox that can be seen in the top right corner of the window.
there is a hole in a wall of a birdbox where birds can go in and out.
the way a person says words usually comes from where he or she was a child, and other people where he or she lives.
people learn how to say words and sentences so that they sound the same as when others speak.
people speaking the same language can have different accents.
even people in the same country can have different accents.
sometimes people can tell what city someone lived in when as a child, by the way that person speaks.
when first trying to learn a new language, often a person will still have his or her old accent.
people may be able to guess what country or place that person lived in before.
if someone can learn another language well enough, he or she may not have the old accent anymore.
he was the youngest of four children.
he became blind at the age of three.
it spread to his other eye and soon, he became blind in both eyes.
later he became a church organist.
they give birth to living babies and they feed their babies milk.
but their babies are born very young and very small.
after the birth the baby goes into its mother's pouch, where it can drink milk and is kept warm and safe.
when the babies are very young they stay in the pouch all the time, but when they are older they can leave it for short times.
laws of war
the laws of war are some simple rules which most people accept about fighting.
many people think that because there is fighting, there are no rules.
but laws of war have been made so that wars do not get worse than they need to be.
there are many temples in maharashtra and some of them are very old.
many people play it and many others watch it.
the festival which lasts ten days is in honor of ganesha, the hindu god of learning and knowledge.
best was devastated, and tried to form other bands with little success.
his grandmother did not tell him the truth until he was nine years old.
he was not happy because he could not be with her because she was married to someone else.
they got married in may 1979.
it also means that they follow the teachings of the church.
when her husband was president, she was given the title of first lady of the united states.
she is a lawyer and was the first lady of arkansas before being first lady of the united states.
first lady of the united states.
when she was first lady, she tried to change the health care system.
some people didn't like it when the planning meetings were kept secret away from the public.
in the end, too many people did not want the changes that she wanted.
when she decided that she wanted to be senator, she chose new york even though she never lived there.
this is second largest language spoken in india and 15th largest spoken language in the world.
this is the one of the oldest languages in the world.
some people complain that the games are not as good as games on the xbox 360.
the new nxe shows all your friends and what there doing at that time.
this is where you can invite other friends to be involved in a big chat.
which will invite them to the game your playing and the party your in.
in latin language it is called "vratislavia"
during the second world war the city was badly damaged.
but he died because he was shot.
they are so tiny they can be seen only through a microscope.
there they begin to reproduce and spread while using the human body as a source of their own nutrients and energy.
if something is international, it has to do with more than one country.
an important fact to remember in calculus is that the derivative of a constant is always zero.
there are many different kinds of poker.
this is what makes it possible to bluff.
the dry season starts in mid-october and it lasts until mid may.
the dry season is called "summer" and the rainy season is called "winter."
someone who has a job looking after forests is called a forester.
many of them are disappearing because there are so many people in the world.
a forester has the job of making sure that the forest and all the wildlife that lives there is healthy.
the snake river flows along much of the border with idaho.
8 bits are called a byte.
he was born at valladolid, and was the only son of holy roman emperor charles v and his wife to live until he was an adult.
his rule was filled with troubles that caused him to be harsh on his people and other nations.
his father wanted him to become more european but the people there thought he was too cold and serious.
he did not have a wife or any children.
mary lost a faithful friend and also her pride.
edward himself did not want mary to succeed him, he had always wanted elizabeth to become queen after him.
in the end, the lady who had suffered so, would still not get her wish come true.
a number of terrible things could then happen to you.
it is not known whether this game was actually about mary tudor.
he died when he was only 15 years old.
he was one of the leaders of the third crusade against saladin.
he fought in the battle of acre and the battle of arsuf.
he was considered a very brave and noble king, but he did not spend a lot of time in england.
on his way back from the crusade.
she should not be confused with the actress who uses the same name.
this was to take control of the council of wales.
he claimed that was acting by his conscious and he would like nothing more than to be proved wrong.
an official from rome was brought over and a trial was held.
the official stated that he could not come to a conclusion and the case would have to be referred to rome for the pope to make a decision.
the matter dragged on for quite some time, as the pope would not agree to a divorce.
a license tells what someone can do with something that was bought.
it also tells what cannot be done with it without getting into legal trouble.
the language spoken there is spanish.
part of the state has a border with the country of canada.
they are known as the twin cities.
because it is so cold the state has a short growing season.
during the summer the weather is hot and humid.
it had been for many years before cairo, an old military base for egypt, became a city.
this is done depending on what you want to do.
most of the business that takes place in alberta happens in calgary.
calgary can be warm during the summer and is sometimes cold during the winter.
sound cannot travel in a vacuum.
sometimes it is just called a "vacuum".
many historians believe that he married her because she was young and healthy, and he wanted a son for an heir.
he was accused of having raped a woman and killed her husband.
people about the affair he had had with catherine, and officials started to ask questions about what she was doing in private.
when she heard that the king was in the palace, she got away from her guards and ran towards the room where she thought he was, crying out for mercy, but henry did not hear her.
mary did not want to marry king louis, but agreed when her brother said that she could marry anyone she wanted after louis died.
mary did not have any children while married to louis, but she did when she was married to charles.
she was many years younger than him.
after she got married claude spent the rest of her life having babies.
she died when she was only 24.
historians believe that frances was pregnant at the time of their marriage because she gave birth to a child about six months later.
none of her children lived past a year.
he died at huis doorn and is buried there because he ordered that he did not want to be buried in nazi germany.
the treaty said that stephen would be king for the rest of his lifetime.
so many extra people decided to join that st.
many people think that this is superstition.
friday is also considered the beginning of the weekend, and it is a day of rest for muslims.
it is also the second largest city of egypt.
alexandria is named after its founder.
they want their countries to be free.
the word 'kölsch' comes from the name of the city of cologne.
it is used a lot when talking about something that changes what is happening now.
though there is usually one in most orchestras.
some people call it the "bluegrass state", because of a special kind of grass that grows there.
it is also famous for its horse farms.
in the south is wyoming, and on the west and southwest is idaho.
seas which are not on earth.
in the past, people thought they were water and called them "seas".
wool is the hair of some mammals.
wool can also be made into felt after it is boiled in hot water and rubbed together.
felt can be used to make clothes to keep warm in cold weather.
there are many kinds of saw.
the work carried out with a saw is usually noisy.
using a saw to cut materials is dangerous because of sharp edges and care must be taken not to let sharp edges touch the skin.
parts of the material being cut can fly off the work and become a hazard to breathing, to eyes and to the skin.
connecticut does not have many natural resources so the people had to make things to make money.
most of the state is in the rocky mountains, a large mountain range in the united states.
the state flower and tree are the magnolia.
the dragon took their treasure and now lives in the lonely mountain.
with the help of the ring he can follow gollum and get out of the caves.
the group comes to the home of beorn, a big man that can become a bear.
he frees them and puts them into barrels, which he lets swim down a river out of mirkwood.
they can find the secret door into the mountain, and open it.
the dwarves are happy to be back in their old home, and to have their old treasures back.
both peoples want a part of the treasure, but the dwarves do not want to give them anything.
at the same time they try to destroy a ring which would give the dark lord a lot of power if he got it, but the only place to destroy the ring is deep into the territory of the enemy.
during this war he took back the sixteen rings which he had made together with the elves.
his spirit still existed as long as the ring existed.
there the one ring stayed until the beginning of the story of "the lord of the rings".
the book begins in the third age of middle-earth, in the shire, the land of the hobbits.
they meet a man named strider, and they get a letter from gandalf.
in the letter they are told to go with strider, who is really named aragorn.
many other things are told and revealed.
the council decides that the one ring has to be destroyed, which will also truly kill sauron forever.
at the beginning of the year 3019 the fellowship begins their long journey.
the fellowship stay for a while.
when the fellowship leaves lóthlórien, the elves give them boats with which they can travel down the river anduin.
each member of the fellowship also gets a present from lady galadriel.
boromir becomes himself again and is very sorry for what he tried to do.
frodo decides that he will go alone to mordor, so that the ring cannot influence or hurt anyone else.
but when they arrive it has already been destroyed by the ents.
they find the palantír, which was thrown from the tower by gríma.
frodo's body is found and taken away by a group of orcs.
there they also tell how they got the black ships with the help of the army of the dead.
one time the hobbits are forced to walk with an army of orcs, but they can escape without being discovered.
the 2000 census said the village had a total population of 772.
most of the people living in illinois live near the city of chicago.
the show is in its seventh season, with two more in the works and a movie being planned.
the language is divided into two main dialects.
many of these things are based on lenses, which focus light and can make images of things that are bigger or smaller than the original.
lewis is thought to be one of the greatest athletes of all time.
it also can cause things to turn white or pale.
it has a number of edges.
a sign is something that tells someone what to do, or shows them something.
for example, the stop sign on the road tells the person that they must stop their car there.
felling a cold wind could be a sign that someone left a door or window open.
a road sign or traffic sign is something that gives information in only 1 or 2 words.
it is eaten by humans and other animals.
it can be made into flour or beer.
pliny the younger was the only person to write the story down.
there were many ways that people died.
one was that the smoke that they breathed in was deadly because it dried in their lungs and formed glass.
this makes it hard for some new visitors to breathe.
spain was interested in finding gold in ecuador.
it is number six among cities in florida by number of people.
they are usually found at the end of a book or report that uses difficult or special words.
many people lived in different parts of palestine, and built their civilizations.
paul the apostle
he grew up learning both the jewish law and the greek ways of discussing things.
while he was on the road to damascus in search of christians there, he had a vision.
in the vision jesus christ spoke to him, telling saul that his persecution of christians was a persecution of jesus himself, and that it did not please god.
saul was blinded by the vision.
a short time later he met ananias of damascus, a disciple of jesus, and his sight came back to him
he changed his name to paul and he dedicated his life to serving jesus christ.
he used his earlier education to explain his new faith to other people, and discuss things with people who had other beliefs.
he traveled around the roman empire, teaching others about christianity, and wrote letters back and forth with the churches he helped to begin.
he had the rights of a roman citizen, which meant that he could be put to death by having his head cut off with a sword, rather than by crucifixion.
the old testament is considered a holy book for both jews and christians.
it is made up of many different books, and is about god, and the people of israel.
jews usually call it the tanakh.
it is also the word for a painted work of art.
people do not have to go to a famous gallery to view art.
there is a basic difference between drawing and painting.
as a result, most of the times the image will not be clear until it gets to final stage.
a male horse is a "stallion", and a female horse is a "mare".
a young female horse is a "filly", and a young male horse is a "colt".
they are also used for carrying things or pulling wagons, or to help plow fields in agriculture.
they also are still used for work and transportation in some places.
riding a horse to a place is known as coming "straight from the horse."
the latin name for horse is equus.
others believe you go to another place after you die, such as heaven or hell.
others believe that some people change into spirits called ghosts.
it is an important part of many religions.
prayer is done by those who trust the power of word and thought.
it starts with the start of the universe.
it ends with the death of joseph.
god rested on the seventh day and declared it a holy day of rest.
god told them not to eat from the tree of knowledge, which would make them aware of morality and evil and slowly cause death.
a snake tricked eve, and eve ate from the tree of knowledge.
because they did not obey him, god made them leave the garden forever.
cain became jealous of abel and killed him.
later, when the world was full of people who were evil, god chose to kill them and save only the animals and the most morally right person alive.
noah built and filled the boat as he was told, and a flood covered the whole world.
god promised never to send another such flood, and he used the rainbow as a sign of that promise.
the people built a high tower to show the power of mankind.
god felt insulted and gave people different languages to prevent the tower from ever being finished.
as a sign of this promise, the sons of abraham are circumcised.
abraham was ready to do it, but god sent an angel to stop him.
god told him there would be no more human sacrifice.
god destroyed the evil cities of sodom and gomorrah, saving only abraham's nephew lot and his daughters.
jacob traded food to esau for esau's right to carry the family name.
esau later got a blessing of his own.
jacob left to find a wife.
he found rachel and worked for her father, lavan, for seven years to marry her, but was tricked into marrying her sister leah.
he worked for another seven years to marry rachel.
he went back to his home, then moved to bethel, where god told him to change his name to israel.
his wife rachel died after she gave birth to benjamin.
jacob gave his son joseph a coat of many colors.
they covered his coat in blood and told their father he had died.
joseph became a great leader in egypt by predicting a long famine by explaining the pharaoh's dreams.
they did not know that joseph was the leader.
joseph first tricks the brothers, but then gives them food and lets them stay in goshen in egypt.
jacob blesses his sons and then dies.
one day they decide to kill him.
they decide that is not a good thing.
there he is sold as a slave he had 11 brothers!!!
mary magdalene is a woman in all four gospels of the new testament.
she is one of the first witnesses to the resurrection of jesus.
a witness is someone who sees something happen.
they are often used in court to help find the truth.
it is the part of greece which is south of the isthmus of corinth.
the island of peloponnese has lots of mountains and coasts, with the highest part being mount killini.
it is near to the city of corinth.
it is named the child of zeus and niobe in greek mythology.
young spartans were taken from their homes at the age of seven to begin a military life.
women were encouraged to keep healthy so that they could produce healthy, fit babies to grow up to be strong.
there was also a committee of five men who were in charge of the education process that young boys and girls went through.
once a spartan reached the age of 20 he or she would then become a homoios.
both men and women were citizens.
it ruled over the west of peloponnese.
this ski center has a lot of snow through out the winter.
he later quit acting and became a director.
it was called a "world war" because many countries all over the world fought or helped in this war.
of all the wars ever fought, world war ii involved the most countries and killed the most people.
the city was for the first time mentioned in 1275 by king floris v who give the people of amsterdam a bit more freedom.
the city grew fast in the 15th century.
it can be used to treat anorexia.
they may also hear strange sounds, or have strange visions or thoughts called hallucinations.
a person who uses a lot of marijuana or hashish every day may have less interest in going to school or going to work.
they may also have less interest in seeing their friends or family, or doing activities or hobbies that they used to enjoy.
the fact is too much of anything can be bad for you.
in the early 1900s, most rope used to be made from hemp.
during world war ii, the united states government made a movie to get farmers to grow more hemp so that there would be enough to make rope and cloth for the war effort.
they fought over what was to become the southwestern united states and who would own the land.
some people say there is a difference between what people think and feel in this area, and how they actually act (behave).
some love both men and women, but may love one more than the other.
some feel they should have a separate community.
the island has an area of about 430 km².
he soon grows to love her and wants to help her.
it is famous for the golden gate bridge.
a job is work that a person does to earn money.
crops are food plants which are grown by farmers.
growing crops is a part of agriculture.
he was killed in a plane crash at the age of 26.
he may have been paid money for this.
he is now most famous for his writings about the wars between the persian empire and the greek city-states.
he told the story from the greek side, although the war was mostly finished when he was still a child.
he often used stories from people he met to write about other places and happenings.
some people think that herodotus wrote about things that were not true.
it may also be that he thought that these stories were interesting.
his work is important because he lived so long ago and there is very little writing on these subjects from this time.
then it is warmed more as it flows down the other side of the mountains and is compressed.
some people think this is because the people that live there ate some dead animals from the forest.
this is why a person should be careful when inserting something without damaging the walls of this organ.
the play is often just called "hamlet".
she falls into a river and drowns.
it is the most written about story of shakespeare's, and maybe of any story at all.
this makes them different from a clavichord where the strings are hit.
on a piano it is possible to play louder or quieter by playing the keys with more or less force.
it makes it possible for the right hand to play the tune on one manual while the left hand plays an accompaniment more quietly on the other.
they could be picked up and put on a table.
all of the speech was in three languages that were spoken at the time of jesus: latin, greek and hebrew.
they said that this would cause people to think that modern-day jews were guilty because of this and increase antisemitism, however this did not happen.
soldiers have fought on horses ever since people have ridden horses.
he was the second cousin to james madison.
he was famous for his books for children.
the city was important from the roman period to the 18th century.
he is back with them since 2003.
it will not melt from a solid to a liquid but instead changes directly from a solid to a gas.
the gas is so cold that when it mixes with air it cools the water vapour in the air to fog, which looks like a thick white smoke.
almost one out of every three people in europe got the disease and died.
the disease spread all over europe, the middle east and parts of asia.
such a theory can of course not account for the spreading of a disease from one person to another one.
they had been asked by philipp vi about the cause of the disease in 1348.
there has been a lot of development work which is part of a regeneration plan for liverpool.
serfs got protection and the right to work on the leased fields.
if his lord sold some land, the serf of that land went with it to serve their new lord.
a free man became a serf usually because of a large debt.
he would make an agreement with the lord of the land.
the lord would keep him safe, give money for his debt, and give him land to work on, and he would do work for the lord.
all his children would become serfs.
at different times in the year he would do different things.
the rest of his time he could take care of his own fields, crops and animals.
the big problem for serfs was that he had to do the work for the lord before he could do his own work.
the lord would give them very good food when they worked for him.
money was not very common then, so usually they paid by giving food instead of money.
there were strange tests to decide if something was good enough to be given for taxes.
sometimes their taxes had to be paid in wheat, which is very difficult to grow.
they took the wheat they didn’t give for taxes to the market.
the lord could not make the serfs leave his land unless he had good reasons.
the lord was supposed to protect them from criminals or other lords, and he was supposed to give them charity during famines.
they had to work 4 days per week in the 17th century.
they had to work 6 days per week in the 18th century.
they had to pay a fine when they inherited money or property.
they had to pay a fine if they became a priest or monk.
they had to pay a fine if their children went to the city instead of staying and being a serf.
they had to give their best animal to their lord when they died so that their children would get to stay on the land.
many peasants had to pay a fine because they used their own grain mill.
they still had to farm their lands to feed their families, and pay their taxes.
the main difference was that they could be forced off their lands if they didn’t pay the rent, or if their lord decided he wanted to use their fields for raising sheep (for example) rather than corn.
the lords took the best land for themselves.
they took the lands from the wealthy romans as the landlords but left the economic system of serfdom.
it was followed by a long time when there were no strong central governments in most of europe.
this system gave most of the agricultural labor during the middle ages.
there was slavery during the middle ages, but it was not common.
farmers wanted to move to towns to make more money than working in the fields.
land owners also put their money into industries that made more money for them.
it became the main way around the 15th century.
these authorities would then "buy" their agricultural produce at very low prices and use the money they made to invest in heavy industry.
it is possible that a system like this still is happening in rural china.
people put food and drinks in it, to keep it cold or good (unspoiled) for a longer time.
it takes heat away from the air inside the fridge.
the heat gets added to the air from outside.
it is also the largest city in that country.
there are more than 40 churches in vilnius.
a fungus breaks down the dead matter around it and uses it as food.
only 1 in every 1000 young people can speak it.
the gold rush was the time after gold was found in california.
they did this to make money.
his mother died when he was a year old and his father spent most of his time abroad working as a diplomat.
later he left his wife and children and went to europe for several years with another woman.
as he got older his music became more and more personal.
he wanted this work to be performed beside a lake in india.
this work was never finished or performed, and we do not know whether he seriously thought it would happen, but he did buy himself a sun helmet.
he used it in lots of ways.
his first years as leader were prosperous.
this has had a serious impact on how the country is seen from outside.
this was done because human rights abuses came to the attention of the united nations.
a struggle for who is to come after him would begin.
he went to prison for two years of hard labour because he had a sexual relationship with a younger man.
this is believed to have contributed to his death at the age of 46.
this is more than any other rock band.
all other u2 members were married by 2006, and adam was the only member who was still single.
they were planning to marry in the summer of 2007, but they split up in february 2007..
she has an older sister called alison and an older brother called morgan.
he grew up cared for by his mother and an uncle.
a person could wash dishes either by hand or by operating a dish washing machine.
he became good at speaking other languages.
adams was able to pass some law that made new roads and canals in the united states.
this meant that in the middle ages there was lots of business between traders who were passing through europe to russia or from south russia to scandinavia.
it is a big sea port.
regions of italy
italy is a country in south of europe.
it is divided into 20 regions.
a regions is a part of the country with a government and a president.
in italy regions can decide some things.
in some regions lives people speaking other languages.
they have different problems then other regions.
so they have also some different laws.
here is the list of the regions and the capital.
he wrote his first books in russian, and after he became very popular, he wrote in english.
it is in west yorkshire and part of the west riding of yorkshire.
it began to be used from 1582.
this difference is just over ten minutes each year.
so what they did was to move the calendar forward ten days in 1582, and at the same time to make sure it didn't happen again.
japan also starts year one with each new reign, but use reign names not the name an emperor might be best known by in the west.
some old dates in britain used to be shown with two years.
this is because britain did not start a new year until march, so for a few months it was one year in britain and the next year in europe.
this became 5 april, and was used as the first day of the year for working out taxes and rents.
taxes and rents went on using the old way of working out leap years so in 1800 the year started on 6 april.
but it was not changed in 1900, so the tax year in the united kingdom still begins 6 april.
the goal in sufism is to reach god not only in the hereafter, but in this world.
the young doves and pigeons are called "squabs."
pigeons and doves are thick-bodied birds with short necks and short narrow bills.
the nests of doves are usually made of sticks.
the dove returned with an olive branch.
they have the same job but a different title.
chancellor is also a title given to public officials in some other countries.
his presidency suffered from a number of scandals and is thought to be one of the worst by many historians.
there are many different kinds of flies.
it is equal to 1000 kilograms.
she then started teaching at a school for the deaf children.
the name of their first son was john coolidge.
she did not allow her personal sadness to disturb her work as the first lady.
the blacksmith puts pieces of iron in the fire to make them hot.
hot iron becomes cold very soon.
this is a special way to make the steel hot and then cold, so that the steel will become hard enough to keep a cutting edge (blade).
it will be so hard, that if someone hits it or drops it, it can break like glass.
iron will show the same temper colors as steel, but it will not be hard.
there are now very few blacksmiths in countries that have a lot of factories.
the few blacksmiths that are still in countries with a lot of factories, make iron that is art.
people buy this iron as art, because each piece is different from the other pieces.
one of them is the sambil.
this is the third time the olympics have been held in london.
he is strong enough to lift almost anything.
he can run and move faster than a bullet.
he decides to use his special powers to fight crime and save people in danger.
it makes him sick and weak.
his enemies use it to hurt him.
if the exponent is equal to 2, then the power is called square because the area of a square is calculated using formula_12.
a restaurant is a place where food is sold to the public.
some restaurants are a chain, meaning that there are a lot of restaurants that have the same name and serve the same food.
at some restaurants you do not have to even get out of the car to eat.
you can pay and get your order from a window.
some people eat it every day.
some animals and some people cannot eat chocolate because they get sick.
one of the last things to be done is something called conching.
conching should be done for at least several hours in order to make good chocolate.
the cacao tree was first found to be useful for its seeds about two thousand years ago.
only the important people could drink it.
later on, this drink was made sweeter and made into the treat that is known today as hot chocolate.
though some is made in india
many of the parts of the violin are named after parts of the body: the front is called the “belly”, the back is the “back”, the sides are the “ribs”.
it is held in place because the strings are so tight.
the bridge helps to send the vibrations of the strings down to the body of the instrument.
inside the body there is a “soundpost”.
the top of the strings are wound around pegs.
the very top of the neck is called the “scroll”.
these are now made of foam, with special legs to hold them on to the violin.
the bow can be made of several kinds of wood, for example pernambuco.
gradually the player can learn how to stop the strings with the fingers to get all the different notes.
on the d string it is playing a stopped e. when he or she is more advanced they will play in other positions by moving the left hand up the fingerboard nearer to the bridge.
when sitting he may have to turn his right leg in so that it does not get in the way of the bow.
people compared him to the devil because he could play so brilliantly (and because of his looks).
they are all the same thing.
these often rest on ballast, which is a name for very small pieces of broken up rock that are packed together and keep the railway tracks in place.
the railway tracks are a large part of the system and provide smooth and hard surfaces on which the wheels of the train roll with a little friction.
a waterway is any body of water that can be used for transportation by people in boats.
they must be wide and deep enough for the boats, and either have no waterfalls and rapids, or have ways for boats to get around them, such as locks.
sometimes they turn onto the other track.
he was born in the town of swansea.
people who live in indiana or are from there are called hoosiers.
wolves have fur made up of two layers.
wolves live in groups called "packs".
the leaders are called the alpha male and the alpha female.
wolves make a noise called a "howl".
the main reason wolves become violent is for food or to protect other wolves in the pack.
there had been no wolves there for a long time.
many people were not happy about this because they were afraid that the wolves would eat the sheep and cows near the park.
he has since been a regular on the team sheet.
it is completely surrounded by land.
few people live there, since it is in a very hot desert.
some of the people who lived in the area did not like her because of her beliefs about how the gorillas should be treated.
many people all over the world now think she is a hero for what she did to help gorillas.
there is a movie that was made based on what she experienced in africa.
many people think poachers did this but there are other people who believe her murder was because of her beliefs against using the gorillas for tourism and financial gain.
it is on the south east of the east coast.
a lot of ferrets in one place will sometimes have a strange scent.
three dog night
many people enjoyed his music and tried to play the same way as he did.
he is best known for the music that he played without singing words.
a nurse is a person who is trained to give care (help) to people who are sick or injured.
nursing is a profession, like a doctor, but training for a nurse is different in how long a person must train and what kind of training they need.
because of this shortage nurses will sometimes travel to another location to work for a few months in what is called travel nursing
both must complete education past high school.
a pilgrimage is when people travel to a place of worship that is usually far away.
they may have to go to a different city or country.
this makes them very quite sweet.
the green rind on the outside is not usually eaten, though it can be used as a vegetable.
many people like to eat watermelon in the summer because the fruit is cool and refreshing.
the black sea is a sea surrounded by land.
he is known for his country and rock songs.
sometimes people call him the godfather of grunge because the style of some of his songs led to the kind of music called grunge music that started to be popular in the early 1990s.
this has been the case since the early 1990s.
the king of ethiopia then took part of ifat and added it to his kingdom, and made ifat pay him lots of money once a year.
they had taken over the whole east african coast up to baraawe, and were trying to take over mogadishu.
the kingdom of italy had just come together as one country around this time, and wanted the same things that the other big countries had, like colonies.
italy offered to buy the rights to the east africa coast from oman, who was in charge of protecting the cities and small kingdoms there, and oman agreed.
italy made deals with some of the larger kingdoms for them to be under italian protection, but the smaller ones italy just invaded.
the french got in on this too, but they just took over a small area which today is djibouti.
the ethiopians complained that they should be able to keep the areas they conquered, and the italians also complained the same thing, so in the end the ethiopians got to keep their bit, and the italians did too.
eventually, some of the rebel groups decided to make their own governments in the land that they controlled.
almost everyone disagreed with this decision, and that same year a rebellion against this new government broke out in mogadishu and spread across the whole country by 2008.
it is much smaller than the ipod, but does not hold as many songs.
it is the least expensive ipod.
this is what they are called especially in the united states and australia, where they have cult followings.
he is known for writing country songs for other people or singing them himself.
this value is always the same for any circle.
the tower was once leaning more and more to the ground, but recently it has stopped falling.
a tower is a tall building.
the youngest and largest of these is called rangitoto, an island just a few kilometres from the city centre.
in capitalism, people may sell or lend the things they own, and other people may buy or borrow them.
if one person wants to buy, and another person wants to sell to them, they do not need to get permission from any king or group.]
— people can have a market (buying and selling with each other) without anyone else telling them to.
the word "capital" means any thing or money that a person owns, that can be used to produce more things or money.
they can hire anyone who wants to work in their factories, shops or lands for them for the pay they offer.
people can choose to work for anyone who will hire them in a free market.
the government does not tell people what job to take.
the government also does not stop people from doing a job.
in "feudalism", most people were "serfs" and had to work for the people who owned the land they live on.
in "mercantilism", the government makes it hard to buy things from other countries.
people can put their money together to buy or build things, even if they are too big for one person to make alone.
the people who invest get to be the owners of what they buy or build together.
investors can take their profit and invest it in more businesses, or in making the business bigger.
he said that capitalism would go away after workers decided to take over the government in a revolution.
they don't think workers should take the government, but that there should be no government at all.
there are different words for people who support capitalism.
most people agree that capitalism can only work if the government keeps people from stealing other people's things.
it tries to make sure that people buy and sell fairly, and that businesses do not hurt workers.
because the government takes a lot of money in taxes, it also buys a lot of things and gives a lot of money away.
sometimes government gives money to people just because those people support the politicians who are in office.
when the government is in charge of part of the economy, this is called a "mixed economy".
a few people think that people can protect themselves without any government.
these people think that the government is a thief, because it takes taxes away from people against their will, and keeps them from making agreements between themselves.
the north is hot and dry.
but her very sexual image at the time was looked down on.
it is usually kept by humans as livestock, which means it is kept for its meat and eggs.
a handheld is an object that can be picked up using a hand.
it is the part of a computer that reads and writes the disk that can be removed.
he also received many more after his death.
black leaders did not like this about him.
he bought a house in an area where white people lived.
cole and his family refused to leave and lived in the house without problems.
they believed that white people in the southern part of the united states would not buy their products.
at the age of fifteen, he left school and went to work in the music business.
he was already writing his own songs.
his ideas were so endless that he was not even troubled when he once lost some music he had been writing.
it was a song called "swanee."
the two brothers were very different.
it was not like any other opera or musical play they had ever seen.
he believed some of his greatest music had gone into the opera.
they called it happy and full of life.
they called it silly and long-winded.
everyone mourned the loss of the man and all the music he might have written.
he was the youngest of five children.
he wrote his first song for his mother when he was eight years old.
she was one of the most important music teachers of the time.
experts say "fanfare for the common man" was an example of the way copland changed the kind of music he wrote during the 1940s.
he began writing music that was more easily understood and more popular.
he said that there was no reason to continue writing music as if these things had not been invented.
his interest and activities beyond music.
his music was no longer as easy to understand, nor as popular.
the mouth starts out making a sound like the soft "a" sound in "flat," then moves to make the a hard "oo" sound like the one in "caboose."
a diphthong can be a lexeme of a language and as such it can as well be all one syllable.
the price is right
a monophthong can be a lexeme of a language and as such it can as well be a syllable.
this is the reason why these kinds of radiation are dangerous to life.
in the past no transsexual person would ever be given medicines or surgery until they had lived as the other sex for a while.
this was usually for one or two years.
the reason for this was to make sure that the person really knew what life would be like after transition.
this was partly because they felt that doctors did not respect them enough to make their own decisions.
it was also because some transsexual people were placed in terrible danger by the rle.
it does not make voices higher.
so transsexual women have to do many other things to make their bodies more female.
this is a painful treatment that can cause scars if done wrong.
the vagina will never look exactly like a real one, and there will be scars on each side of the new labia majoris.
some transsexual men may be able to be seen by people as completely male after a year or two of testosterone.
this is especially true if he has small breasts.
but it does not work as well to have and enjoy sex.
a telephone book is a kind of book that has lists of phone numbers of people and businesses.
people use phone books to look up the phone numbers of people and places when they need to call them.
many different people use the internet.
the experts say some businesses could no longer exist without the internet.
the experts list a number of things computer users can also do to help protect their computers.
make copies of all important documents and keep them in a safe place.
this should be done often to protect valuable information.
hades is a god in greek mythology, and one of the twelve olympians.
he is the god of the greek underworld, which is also called pluto.
people with learning disabilities, also called learning difficulties, are people who find it hard to gain knowledge or understanding.
some people with learning difficulties also find it hard to fit in with other people because there are many things that people must know to live in society.
they can also be very big things that mean a person needs a lot of help (like autism).
adults with learning difficulties are sometimes misunderstood by other people who think that they are stupid or have mental illnesses.
however, they can often deal with their difficulties by doing things in different ways.
some people with learning difficulties can be very clever.
a wheelbarrow is a kind of vehicle that is built to be pushed around with a load.
most of the time it has one wheel, but sometimes has two.
first lady of the united states
the first lady of the united states is the wife of the president of the united states.
if the president is not married, or his wife is unable to do the jobs of first lady, a family member such as daughter or sister usually is considered the first lady.
the first lady is not chosen by the people of the united states, and there are no things that she must do.
she is also not paid anything for being first lady.
they are trained to use the force for good purposes.
the sith are group of beings who use the force as a power source, they are trained to use the force to gain ultimate power.
the sith normally use the force to gain power in battles with their enemy who are the jedi.
they also use the force to bring destruction to the universe and anything in their way.
so they are the bad guys.
the force can move things without touching and can predict what is soon to happen.
the people who use the force for good are called jedi; the people who use the force for evil are called the sith.
but then it turns out that the leader of the government is a sith lord, and he gets anakin to help him kill all the jedi.
he is most famous as being the only president not to have married.
a hand is the body part at the end of an arm.
most humans have two hands each, usually with four fingers and a thumb.
on the inside of the hand is the palm.
when something always does the same thing, one can say that there is a rule that it does what it does.
this could be useful for someone that has had an accident or sickness and has lost brain cells.
the country had all of the land from what is now kuwait to oman.
only 1% of the country includes land where crops can be grown.
they can be made in different colors or patterns.
some people say that, of the many people he created in his books, the author himself was his own best creation.
he was the second child in a family of six.
the united states had just entered world war i and he wanted to join the army, but they rejected him because his eyesight was not good enough.
he then joined the red cross to help on the battle fields of europe.
the red cross sent him to italy.
he went close to the fighting to see how he could act in the face of danger.
after less than a year he had changed forever: he needed to write about what he had seen.
but he ran out of money and began to write for a newspaper again.
they hired him and paid him well.
it makes fun of his friend and the way he wrote.
he had to believe he did everything for himself, even when he knew others helped him.
their rooms were small and they did not have water from pipes.
some of these new friends were artists and writers who had come to the city in the 1920s.
he was thankful for their support at the time, but later denied that he had received their help.
it was a wonderful feeling when i had worked well."
the story is about two kinds of rivers.
one is calm and clear, and is where the young man fishes.
he does not talk much about the war.
the war had destroyed their dreams and had given them nothing to replace those dreams.
the book was an immediate success.
he wrote about what he knew and felt.
he was able to paint in words what he saw and felt.
but when he was right he was almost perfect.
many people came to see him.
he agreed to give her money he earned from his books.
but the end of his first marriage made him want to leave the place where he had first become famous.
when i returned to it, i found it had changed as i had changed.
paris was never the same as when i was poor and very happy."
he lay with his head on two pillows.
he did not look at nick.
it sounded silly when he said it.
he felt that writers should not be judged by those who could not write a story.
in the morning he wrote, in the afternoon he fished, and at night he went to a public house and drank.
he asked a lot of questions.
he was the only one i really cared about."
when hemingway returned to work there was a sadness about his writing that was not there before.
his new book told about an american soldier who served with the italian army during world war one.
the rain had stopped during the forenoon and three times we had heard planes coming, seen them pass overhead, watched them go far to the left and heard them bombing on the main highroad....
the river was high and the bridge had been blown up in the center; the stone arch was fallen into the river and the brown water was going over it.
and if i can write any of it down truly, then it will represent all of spain."
and he believed it was a true test of a man's bravery, something that always concerned him.
he agreed to write about the war for an american news organization.
the car carried two white flags to show they were not fighting.
but he sees no hope except the victory of his side.
he decides that "he can live as full a life in seventy hours as in seventy years."
later days and his married life.
the book was a great success.
he had met her while they were working in spain.
but this marriage did not last long.
he began to feel that whatever he said was right.
but he was too sick to take part in the ceremony.
even worse, he felt that he no longer was able to write.
he seemed to be living the story about the writer who had sold his writing skill in order to make money.
you can even use small "emoticons" to express what you are trying to say.
a lumberjack is a person who cuts down trees to be made into lumber.
believed to be a descendent of ishmael, a son of abraham, he is considered the most important person in the religion of islam.
however new revelations came to him commanding him to preach what was being sent down from god.
but there were also people who listened to his preaching and obeyed his messages.
no matter how hard they tried, more people were willing to enter islam.
they stayed there for three years without enough food or water.
muhammad had many people welcoming him to their homes, but he used his camel to show everyone where he would build his house.
not everyone was happy about the new changes in medina.
this means that they would not fight each other for ten years.
it did not cost a lot of money, but it was still very fancy.
the mustang is still being sold today and is still very popular.
red hat made it public in the past and it was used by many linux users.
there are lots of different kinds of shooter.
but there are other kinds too.
there are other things in it like vegetables and raw fish called "neta".
some kinds of fish are safe to eat raw, and do not make you ill.
there are different kinds of sushi.
the cause of these earthquakes is believed to be the rising of molten magma because there are no faults or tectonic plate boundaries.
these flows are thought to be a result of the crust getting bigger behind an area where one block of land slides under another.
there have also been some eruptions not very long ago in a time called the pleistocene epoch.
the top of the mountain is mostly covered by snow and glaciers.
they can also be questions about what might be true and what could not be true.
by answering these questions metaphysical philosophers hope they can understand the world in a way that people who do not ask them cannot.
in other areas metaphysics is not very useful, such as finding out what things are made of.
about a quarter of the people live in the east part, where it gets less rain, and some parts have a desert climate.
the largest city on the east part is spokane it is also the second biggest city in the state.
the cascade mountains go down the middle of the state and break it into two sides.
in mathematics, a rational number is a number that can be written as one whole number divided by another whole number.
most of the numbers people see every day are rational.
there are numbers which are not rational.
we can then divide both sides by 99.
we can also define a total order on q by writing
that many numbers are counted several times here, is not a big problem.
we could also imagine leaving them out.
another tradition is you have to wear green clothing or you will be pinched.
he wanted people to think of him as a healer and not a psychic.
this means he could talk while sleeping and answered questions about a person's health, past and future.
he read the bible many times starting when he was 10 years old.
he wanted to tell people about god and heal them.
his family worked on a farm.
he had to live at home with his parents for almost a year.
when he woke up his voice stayed normal.
he asked for people to give him money to support himself and his family so that he could work full time.
he increased his readings to 8 times a day to try to keep up.
this caused problems with his health.
on the times when he could not give a clear reading, he said it was because he was working under too great a pressure.
in these cases, he always gave the money back to the person he was giving a reading to.
while he seemed to sleep, he would say where the person was.
he would sometimes name the streets along the way.
a message would then be given to the person telling them how to get better.
cayce himself did not claim to be able to do all these things.
what is known is that by the time he got some of the letters, the client had already died.
this tree is sometimes called rose of sharon in english.
and in japan, the flowers are often shown at tea ceremonies for decoration.
its beach is very attractive and visited by many tourists and natives.
the pool is formed only when tide is low and people can get there by boat.
it is considered the most beautiful beach in the city.
the long extension of land was full of coconut trees and was a wild and quiet place.
the place has good hotels and restaurants and some of them are the best ones in the city.
from this place is possible to see as the atlantic ocean as the mundaú lake and because of this the area was strategically important to military force in the colonial age.
he wrote two books that are very important in the fields of physics and philosophy.
he found that he himself must be real (exist) because he felt that he was thinking and if he was thinking then he must be real.
this is because if he was not real then how would he have this feeling that he was thinking.
he also thought he could show that god exists, in the same way that he felt that he was thinking.
descartes said that god was the same as infinity and that he could clearly see infinity because he could think of every larger object but no largest object.
descartes said that if god exists then the world must exist as well, as god was good and would not let us think the world is real (exists) if it didn't.
finally, descartes thought that because he knew he was thinking, but could only know anything else about himself (for example that he had two arms and two legs) because he knew that god exists, then he must in fact be made up of two things: the mind that thinks, and the body that does not.
he is often called a rationalist, because he looked inside his mind for answers to his questions.
it is placed on the great lake victoria.
it is one of the most important cars in history because it was one of the first cars to be sold for very little money, making it easy for people to travel from place to place.
why the model t was so important.
only people with lots of money could afford them.
ford knew that if he built his cars on an assembly line instead of one at a time like other cars, he could make a car that anyone could afford and would be built like cars that cost more money.
he also knew that he could pay his workers lots more money.
the beginning of the model t.
workers from all over the world wanted to work for ford because of the good pay.
workers could even save their money for a model t of their own!
before long, a new model t rolled off the other end of the line.
the time it took a chassis to become a finished car was over twelve hours when the first model t's were built.
by the time the last model t came off of the line, ford had so many auto plants it was making one car every 27 seconds!
that meant the model t had to be very strong, and it was.
the engine on the model t was started with a hand crank on the front of the car.
this could be dangerous if a person was not careful.
many people got broken arms this way.
this helps the model t come to a stop without causing the engine to stop as well.
the car needed to be able to travel at least 100 km/h, or about 60 mph.
the first name given to the car was "kdf-wagen."
they are different from compilers because they do not make a new file to run the program.
horseshoes are things worn by horses to protect their feet when they walk - like a shoe.
people also put horseshoes over doorways, because a long time ago, many people thought it was a sign for good luck and it protected whoever walked under it from evil spirits.
the play is about two noble families that live in the old italian city of verona.
he tells the montagues and the capulets that there must be no more fighting or they will have to pay, but it is very hard to control the young men.
their love should heal all the problems between their families, but because they are only teenagers, they think they will get into trouble from their parents, so they marry in secret.
because this play was written in the 1500s, the english language that it uses is not exactly like the english that is used today.
many words are used a little bit differently to the way they are used today, and other words are used that are now only used sometimes in poetry.
the servants in the play usually talk in prose.
but she cannot sleep so she stands at her window and pretends she is talking with romeo.
there have also been forty different films
rock and roll
this music was very different from the music that was popular with their parents.
they did not think young people should listen to it.
it also made the song a huge hit.
he was the first person to present black music so it appealed to both blacks and whites.
it was also in the 1960s that rock and roll music began to change.
the words became as important as the music.
rock music from the 1970s was usually louder and harder than the rock and roll from the 1950s.
most people think he invented the electric light bulb, but he really only improved it, to make it last long enough to help people see in the dark.
it happens to some women when they are pregnant.
they may even appear to have had too much alcohol.
sometimes it is also treated by giving an injection of a medicine called 'glucagon'.
so giving it will cause the blood glucose to rise by forcing stored glucose into the blood.
this causes them to have more injuries and not realize they have hurt themselves.
this can be so bad that people need strong pain medicines.
because of the damage that is caused by high blood glucose it is important to treat diabetes mellitus.
these are different ways of saying the same thing, very much like yards and meters are different ways of measuring distance.
this is to make sure they do not get hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia.
this tells the doctor what the average blood glucose has been for about the past 90 days.
if this is not found early and treated it can cause blindness.
both of these diseases damage blood vessels.
it was called jakarta again by the japanese during world war 2
they are one of the best selling american groups of all time, second only to the beach boys.
they ended up with a new contract that said they would make three more albums.
the members of tool decided to take some time away after that.
death was one of the first ever death metal bands in north america.
they started in 1983 under the name mantas and then the name was changed to death in 1984.
the part on the model that takes the changing signals and helps turn them into movement is called the receiver.
radio control was once used by the military to control large weapons.
these are joined by a small part of river in constance.
the lake covers about of total area.
this has not happened since then.
towards the end of the edo period, two military clans, the minamoto and taira, had grown so powerful that they took control over the country and fought wars against each other as each one tried to be more powerful.
this is why the country needed lots of samurai.
furthermore, he made it a law that the samurai were the only people who were allowed to arm themselves with a sword.
a samurai believes that his swords hold his soul, so they became the most important thing he has.
in this ritual they cut their stomach before the enemy was able to capture them, in the case of a war.
most of them took care of house and crops and raising children.
there were a few women who were samurai.
they usually did this while their warrior husbands were busy in battles.
they did not do any physical work.
special books were written for women.
plato said that people should not do bad things because people who do bad things end up unhappy.
however people who do good things end up happy.
he also said that if people who do bad things get power in a society then that society will become an unhappy one.
plato believed that philosophers are best able to do good things and so they should be given power in a society.
he thought that non-philosophers should allow themselves to be ruled by philosophers and that if they do this then they will be happy.
however in order not to be tempted to do bad things, the philosophers who have power must not be able to own things or feel love.
he said that a good person will listen to all these things, but will let the mind control the other two.
somebody who does not listen to all three parts, or who does not let the mind control the other two will be unhappy.
they might go mad because they do not let the mind control them.
or they might do things that they later regret.
they will also be disliked by other people and will suffer because of that.
he said that they will be like a country in anarchy.
the soldiers will not even listen to their minds, and the workers will not listen to their minds or their souls.
this is why the philosophers should rule and the other types of people should be soldiers and workers.
subjectivism says that something is beautiful to me if i say it is beautiful.
it can also mean to keep repeating the same information in a different way or make no useful points.
they are an important part of the story.
the others are owned by private collectors.
he was born the fourth of fourteen children, and his family was sharecroppers.
beauty is a property of certain things.
there are many other theories, and some things that people say are beautiful do not fit in to any of these ideas, for example sunsets.
the left hand holds the neck of the guitar while the fingers press the strings to the fretboard.
in many countries and at many different time periods, guitars and other plucked string instruments have been very popular, because they are light to carry from place to place, they are easier to learn to play than many other instruments.
it is about 500 years old.
it comes as a feeling or a memory, a laugh or a sigh.
the beautiful music that has been made by the four members of phish is some of the most mindblowing music there has been.
but you have to get it.
however none of them sold as many as their first album, dookie.
after taking a break in 1996, green day began to work on a new album in 1997.
the band was upset and chose not to try to re-create the stolen album, but instead start over with a vow to be even better than before.
he said he wanted the new music to dig into what he's feeling during that time - which is middle-aged.
most of their songs are fast-paced and under the average song length of four minutes (4:00), though some of their songs run on longer such as "jesus of suburbia" which runs for nine minutes.
they are played by a turntable.
the needle goes in between the little grooves.
it would end up being his final tour.
it is not always done to the point of orgasm.
masturbating can be done alone or with a partner, either by watching each other or by helping each other.
the main female sex organ is the clitoris.
some women may have problems reaching an orgasm, especially when they are young, and have little experience masturbating.
other people of the same age or standing - called peers - can also influence this frequency.
when he was 3 years old, his father died, and he lived with his mother after that.
confucius did not like this and wanted to bring back order to society.
instead he wanted people to think hard about problems and to learn from others, especially from history.
confucius also thought that people should get power because they were good and skilled, and not just because they came from powerful families.
confucius wanted people to think about other people more than about money or what they owned.
however he also felt that there should be strong rules in society and that people needed to obey them.
confucius said that people should only do things to other people if they would be ok with other people doing those things to themselves.
this is sometimes called the golden rule and was also taught by jesus christ.
his students wrote down small stories about him, and things that he said.
these were put together to make a book called the analects.
on that day people celebrate teachers.
sometimes they first make small toy-sized buildings called models to show what the building will look like when it is done.
there are special tests that must be taken before becoming an architect.
they should also know how to make a building attractive, so that people will enjoy using it.
paper did not exist in europe at this time and vellum or parchment were very expensive and could not be made in large sizes.
as towns and cities grow, it often becomes necessary to make roads wider, or perhaps to build a new train station.
even very important buildings may get knocked down to make way for change.
arches are often used where buildings are made of lots of small stones or bricks.
the stone at the very top of the arch, called the keystone, keeps the rest of the arch stones from falling down.
it is on the lower center of the vulva.
if the teen is small it will hurt more because the skin has to stretch and the blood has to flow to the breast.
a study showed that this has little to do with breastfeeding.
when this happens it is called "lactation".
the breasts of a woman also play a role in human sexual behaviour.
they can also give pleasure to the individual.
the thumb is one of the five fingers on the human hand.
pregnancy is when a female has an unborn baby inside her.
a human pregnancy is usually nine months long.
pregnancy usually starts when a woman has sexual intercourse with a man.
pregnancy is divided into three parts called "trimesters".
during the first trimester, the woman often feels sick in her stomach and has to urinate often.
many other things happen to the woman during pregnancy.
at the end of a full pregnancy, the woman goes into labour, and her body lets the baby come out.
there are also certain sicknesses caused by pregnancy.
sometimes women die from giving birth.
a pregnancy can also stop without the baby being born.
it can happen all by itself (for example because of problems with the baby or the mother).
a forest is an area of land with many trees.
forests are very important and can be found all over the world.
even roads have been built for the peoples to pass though the forest to reach their destination.
usually it is men who go to a barber.
a carpenter is a person who works with wood.
a roof is the top part of the building.
it keeps out rain and snow and protects people from the sun.
you can walk on a flat roof.
at the edge of a flat roof there is sometimes a parapet, which prevents people from falling off the roof.
the center is called a "quill".
down is also used in blankets.
it is also used by male birds to attract female birds.
so the cholesterol in the food people eat can only come from eating food from animals.
doctors often measure these different types to see if someone has hypercholesterolemia.
if it is hurt from low blood flow, but not enough to die, it is called "ischemia".
then that part of the heart dies.
the best way to treat it is to not get it!
some are things people can change.
if people already have atherosclerosis that causes problems like heart attack or strokes, medicine is almost always needed.
people with atherosclerosis must also be watched by doctors to make sure they do not get ischemia or infarction.
this may be done my surgery or sometimes with very strong medicines to make the blood less able to make clots.
if both diabetes and hypercholesterolemia happen in the same person the problems from these diseases can be much worse.
there are many farms in iowa.
people who have a gender identity that is different from the sex of their body are called transgender.
this is different from "gender identity" because people can choose to act one way even if that is not how they feel inside.
sometimes people just call this "presentation".
when we talk about 'male' we usually think this means all three things.
in most people they are all the same – either male or female.
sex is what they body looks like.
this is also whether someone has a deep (male) voice or a high (female) voice or whether someone has a beard or has muscles like a man or a woman.
because these are confusing ideas, here are some examples to think about.
here are some of those possible combinations.
many people like this may dress and act like men and take jobs that are usually done by men.
this person may call himself transgender.
or he may just call himself a man!
however, if they live in a place where transgender people are not accepted they may hide this.
they may also hide it because they are afraid their family will not accept them.
the doctor may help them change their body if that is what they want.
they may feel like this because disease and illness can make it seem like something is wrong with a person.
but if these were not seen as an illness, they might not pay.
this keeps people interested in the game.
people have argued about the army using its money to make a game.
they allowed everyone to play on the side of the good guys.
if people pay a lot of attention might notice that the enemies weapons behave wrong, but it is hard to notice.
the most common is to not let anyone with less than 10 honor in because this is the base level that everyone starts with.
being a medic is an extra ability which is added to the class.
this can be a problem because it makes it so that the player cannot shoot for a few seconds.
most people describe themselves as heterosexual.
a hate crime is when someone hurts another person because of prejudice against a group the victim belongs to.
it is usually not because of something the victim did or said.
it is just because they are a part of a certain group.
this hurt can be physical violence or can be words that hurt (insults).
a specialty is a special part of medicine where a doctor may have more knowledge.
if they are not helped quickly, the person may become more sick or even die.
these are places in hospitals where people go if they have an emergency.
they may have a red cross or red letters on the sign to show it is the emergency department.
they treat people of all ages.
they treat both men and women.
they must know how to treat any kind of emergency.
so em doctors must also know about how to treat "non"-emergencies.
in the past, a doctor could learn almost all that we knew about medicine.
some doctors try to learn "some" about all of the different subjects of medicine and how to treat all patients.
this can then be followed by a one to two year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above.
one of the most important ways that children's diseases can be prevented is by immunization.
today "some" of these deaths are prevented by treating disease when it happens.
they teach parents about safety and nutrition.
she has become a public school teacher like her mother was.
esperanto is a special language that was made to be very easy to learn.
zamenhof made esperanto because he wanted there to be an easy language that everyone could learn, so that people from different parts of the world could easily talk together.
no one knows exactly how many people now speak esperanto.
in recent years it has had around 2000 people from 60 or more countries.
rules in the esperanto language never change and can always be used in the same way.
they are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
her mother died in a car accident.
they got engaged just before bush went to fight in the second world war.
she did her role as the first lady in a nice way.
his brother michael produced their first two or three albums.
a great number of men and women liked the album and they gave in exchange for it much money.
it had the hard rock song "barracuda".
in their home country, they had over 40 hits and made over 30 gold and platinum albums.
this way they learned a lot and the band slowly was becoming a true hard rock band.
but the four sworn friends from the hague always keep their head cool as they heat it up night after night in sold out venues and theatres, when the crowd goes wild for these four living legends.together they may be "rock's best kept secret" in the music universe.
the anus is the hole in the human body that is between the buttocks.
it first came out in 1989.
new songs made that way are called "remixes".
after that, they became one of the most famous bands in the world.
many of the songs were only music with no words.
songs like that are called "instrumentals".
people knew the music of nine inch nails had changed, but many people thought it was better than before.
this was new in the way that music is sold, because usually music is sold for lots of money, and the money is given to many people, most who didn't make the music, but helped give money to the people who did, or sent the music to shops to be sold, or made adverts for it.
they looked at us like we would be ants.
when a hormone is put in the blood it goes to all parts of the animal's body.
there are some kinds of cells whose main job is to make hormones.
(another word for a living thing like a plant or an animal is an "organism".)
but some extra is also saved in the cells to use later.
so it is not controlled by just one hormone.
however a few things are controlled in different ways.
it is more common in water with lots of algae.
they can also get it if they eat food or drink that was polluted with the diarrhoea from people who have cholera.
(that means that the person must be responsible for doing it and must choose to do it).
so for example being pulled along the ground is not an action.
however, other people say that as a person decides not to do anything then that is an action.
some philosophers say that an action is caused by a person wanting something and thinking that by doing that action they can get it.
for example, if i want an apple and think that by walking to a table with some apples on it i can get one, then i will walk to the table.
it is important to have both a want (desire) and a thought about how to get it (belief).
if i think that by walking to a table with some apples on it i can get an apple, but want an orange and not an apple, then i will not walk to the table.
if i want an apple, but think that the table across the room is just a picture of a table, then i will not walk to the table.
these philosophers say that we talk about what we want and what we think because the brain is very complicated and we do not understand it yet.
each kind of piece has different rules to move.
a governor is the leader of a state.
the united states also has many other small parties known as third parties.
he was a new kind of politician who got support from many different kinds of people, especially poor and working people in the country, rather than just from rich people in the city.
this led to a weak and confused party that lost many elections after the war was over.
in the united states, each of the parties are a large coalition that covers many different kinds of ideology.
taste is one of the five senses.
taste is what someone feels on the tongue when food is in the mouth.
an animal knows if something is against a part of its body.
this is called the sense of touch.
it says what happens when forces act on things.
there are two parts of mechanics.
it is good to say what happens to most of the things we can see.
the "third law" says that if one thing puts a force on another thing, the second thing also puts a force on the first thing.
each moai is made out of one large stone but some have an extra stone on top of the head.
it is believed that they were built about 1000 years ago by polynesians, who lived there at the time and were made to honour their ancestors(older family members long dead) and bring good luck.
making the statues would have needed a lot of time and effort.
the book tells us that diogenes died on the same day on which alexander the great died at babylon.
these words mean things that are a little different.
but when people say these words, they usually mean the same thing.
he saw that people who got cowpox did not get sick from smallpox.
but sometimes people who did this got very sick from smallpox.
this was a dangerous thing to do.
but people did it because it was less dangerous then getting smallpox.
the boy did not get sick from smallpox.
this boy was the first person ever to get a vaccination.
it was not until almost 100 years after the smallpox vaccination that medicine found the next vaccination.
a herd is a group of animals.
if they do not get the disease, they cannot give it to other animals.
if none of the other animals in a herd get the infection, they cannot give the infection to the one who is non immune.
this is important in people too.
there will just not be as much of that disease around to get.
the people who are in the 5% are there for many reasons.
some of them are too sick to get the vaccine.
it can be children who are too sick with other diseases to get vaccines.
it can be a pregnant woman who cannot get the vaccine because it could hurt her baby.
it can be an older person who has a weak immune system.
so if everyone in a place gets vaccinated, it protects these people too.
so it is important that people who are healthy get their vaccinations.
so most people do not think about the risk of getting these infections.
many young doctors have not even seen some of these diseases!
some people get a little sick.
they may get fever or feel sick.
this gets better in a few days.
but they do not see how sick "more" people would be if we did not vaccinate people.
some people chose not to get vaccinations because of the small risks.
parents may not give their children vaccines.
these might be healthy people who "chose" not to get the vaccine.
the heart is an organ in the body.
people sometimes talk about the heart as the place responsible for feelings.
this is why love is shown as a heart.
the heart only helps us feel by giving blood to the brain.
some animals have only two or three chambers.
these get blood that comes to the heart.
blood is carried in blood vessels.
blood going to the heart is carried in veins.
blood going away from the heart is carried in arteries.
these bring blood from the body to the right heart.
the valves make sure that blood only goes one way in or out.
this pushes blood out of the heart and into the blood vessels.
the chambers get bigger and blood coming back to the heart fills them.
when they get smaller we also say they "contract".
this is written on paper by a machine.
this writing on the paper is the ecg.
it is called a complex because there are three different waves in it.
babies can be born with heart disease.
for example, heart disease causes 4 out of every 10 deaths in the united states, this is more than all kinds of cancer put together.
for example if a part of the main artery that comes from the heart is narrowed that is called coarctation of the aorta.
one important tribe was the mandan.
the bank of north dakota is where all of the money from all government agencies is held.
the fdic guarantees that people will not lose money if a bank fails.
so it can be written lgbtiqts.
not everyone agrees what should be in the acronym.
a community is a group of people who have something in common.
it is common as a symbol of the peace movement, first used this way in a peace march in italy in 1961.
it shows god's promise to noah and his family to never cover the world in water again.
the next year it was changed to six colors, so it could be easier to make.
this was like the yellow star of david that jews had to wear to show who was jewish.
these parts are separate from each other and the thing cannot be divided up into any other way.
the idea or theory that something cannot be split into any parts is called monism.
the idea that something can be split into many parts is called pluralism.
it was much bigger than the greece we know today.
there was not one country but many little countries called "city states".
the number of greeks grew and soon they could not grow enough food for all the people.
when this happened, a city would send people off to start a new city.
they defeated the people who lived near them and those people had to farm the land for the spartans.
they were also ruled by a group of old men called the gerousia.
the men came to a place in the center of the city and decided what to do.
it was the first place in the world where the people decided what their country should do.
these slaves were owned by their master and could be sold to someone else.
he sent soldiers and ships to fight athens.
athens asked for help from sparta.
the spartan-led forces fought this unstoppable persian force to their deaths in order to block the pass long enough to keep xerxes and his army occupied while the rest of the greek army escaped.
because of the sea the way into the peloponnese is very narrow.
athens was north of corinth and she had many ships.
however persia sent its ships across the sea to help greek cities in anatolia fight for their freedom.
these cities agreed because they were afraid of persia.
many of the cities had to pay athens money.
athens used the money to build many ships.
several times there was war between athens and sparta.
then athens decided to send many ships to sicily to fight against the city syracuse.
the trireme would row itself at an enemy boat very fast, and ram a hole into its hull.
this makes the person have the disease malaria.
a baby can get it while inside its mother.
this is when someone gives blood to another person.
another way people can catch malaria is by using a needle that someone with the disease used before them.
then they change into a different form of "plasmodium".
pregnant women and children are hurt most by malaria.
"most" of these deaths could be stopped with medicine or with ways to stop mosquitoes.
but many of the places malaria may be found are in poor countries.
these countries do not have enough money to stop the mosquitoes, or to give people medicine.
pregnant women and young children have more complications.
how doctors tell if someone has malaria.
doctors also use tests to see if people have a disease.
if a person has symptoms and is in a place where there is malaria, they might have malaria.
to see if they have malaria, doctors may do a blood test.
or it can be because the person looking in the microscope did not know what "plasmodium" look like.
people do not use them as much.
this means that taking the medicine will not cure someone with malaria, because it will not kill the "plasmodium".
the medicine that works for one kind of malaria may not for another kind.
so doctors need to know when this changes.
if a doctor treats a person with malaria, he should know what places in the world have resistant malaria.
if he has not treated a person in a long time, he should check before treating people.
it can be treated with quinine, but this medicine can make people sick.
it can even come back five years later.
some people get very sick from primaquine.
some people do not make enough of an enzyme in the blood.
so people have to be tested to see if they have g6pd-deficiency before they take primaquine.
so a pregnant woman must usually take chloroquine until she has her baby.
even people who are treated with medicines at home should stay with the doctors for 8 hours.
this is to make sure they do not get sicker.
this makes it much harder to treat.
doctors choose the medicines by where in the world the person got malaria.
in some places it is chloroquine-resistant.
but sometimes doctors still use iv quinine.
this is to be very certain they will kill the "p. falciparum".
the best ways are different in different places.
it did not make people very sick at the time it was used.
it did not cost very much money.
they learned also that ddt used in one place may go all over the world.
so people are worried that ddt used today will stay in the world for a long time.
these cost more money than ddt.
be most careful at these times.
this is made from cloth that air can go through but keeps mosquitoes out.
it is put over a bed where people sleep to keep mosquitoes out.
sometimes people also use it when they are not sleeping.
taking medicine to not get sick.
people can take medicine when they are in a place where there is malaria.
many people in areas where there is malaria do not have the money to buy this medicine.
even if the right medicine is used, it does not always work.
sometimes this is because people do not take the medicine the right way.
but even if it is taken right, it does not always work.
the heart plus all of the blood vessels in the body together are called the circulatory system
the circulatory system is the body system that brings blood to the body.
blood that comes from the left side of the heart is full of oxygen and nutrients.
this is the large blood vessel that comes out of the heart.
on the other end of the capillary, it turns into a venule.
the other is the rainbow flag.
many but not all of these women were lesbians.
jews wore the famous yellow star of david.
if a prisoner was both jewish and gay, he would wear a yellow triangle.
we are not sure of the real number.
prisoners who were jewish and homosexual may not have been counted as homosexual.
homosexual prisoners were treated worse than other prisoners.
after world war ii, homosexual men were still not treated well in germany.
it was used to hurt homosexuals and to put them in prison.
it is important not to ignore these deaths.
the killing of homosexuals and that this still happened after wwii is the "secret" story of the holocaust.
it is in respect for those who died.
devil may cry 4
his mother was murdered when he was just 8 years old.
50 cent answered with songs like "mr.
learning english is what people do when they want to learn how to speak and listen to the english language.
people who want to learn english usually also learn to read and write at the same time.
a lot of people also want to spend their own personal time to learn english.
many people join lessons like school lessons but at learning centres where any people can go, no matter their age.
questions are answered quickly even with help from volunteer teachers from all over the world.
an ethical tradition is a group of things that one group of people think are right and wrong.
people believe that these things are right and wrong because other people think that way and they have thought that way for a long time.
an ethical tradition can be like a set of laws because most people agree with it and only do what it says is right.
this is because ethics is about asking questions and not just thinking what other people think.
they also want to know what ethical traditions are the same for different groups of people.
testicles are body parts that are found on the bodies of male creatures.
this is because the testicles work better if they are cooler than the inside part of the body.
a body has lots of different systems that keep it in good working order all the time, and that also provide for a body's special needs.
testosterone is important in a male person's body, because it makes him grow into a man and feel like a man during puberty.
boys begin making sperm when they start growing into men, at a time of life called puberty.
the size has to do with the amount of sperm that the male animal needs to make.
some types of male animal generally only have one sexual partner at a time and are called monogamous.
some types of animals generally live in a herd or flock where one male will have many female sexual partners.
sometimes one or both the testicles are still inside when the baby is born.
sometimes it is necessary for a doctor to remove one or both the testicles.
it looks and feels like a testicle.
young slaves were castrated so that they could be used as guards over the wives of rich men.
it meant that the wives would not fall in love with their guards.
sometimes young boys who had beautiful singing voices were castrated before puberty.
this meant that their voices would stay high all their lives.
these singing men were called castrati.
male animals that are used for meat are generally castrated because it makes them fatter and also makes them quieter to keep because they do not fight each other.
this area is know as the four corners because four states meet there.
it has beautiful rock sculptures and is known around the world for its amazing sights.
he first became famous as a member of the band, the police.
a pedophile is an adult who is sexually attracted to children who have not reached puberty, or who are not yet fully sexually adult.
some people with pedophilia have sex with children or use children in a sexual way.
the common definition also says that a pedophile is at least 5 years older than the victim, and at least 16 years of age.
this is because it is hard to study people's feelings and desires unless they actually show that they have those feelings.
a second reason is that when an adult or teenager sexually abuses a child, people often call the abuser a "pedophile", but it is possible that the abuse happened for a different reason.
around half the adults who commit child sexual abuse against strangers also abuse their own children.
it does not change their sexual attraction.
these rocks cool very fast and leave minerals behind and form these rocks.
it has a bright red to dark red streak.
this means that the testicles always have to be held outside of the body, which is very dangerous.
languages from these places share a common heritage.
if not enough blood goes to a body part, it can get an ulcer.
it is the tube that food goes through when it leaves the stomach.
a symptom is a change in the body that tells someone that they have a disease.
pain is usually in the top of the abdomen below the ribs.
some people also feel pain go up to the chest.
symptoms are ways that you feel or ways that your body appears.
these are things that show if you have a disease.
diagnosis is when a doctor finds out what is making a person sick.
sometimes doctors can diagnose a disease by asking the person questions and looking at the person's body.
tests are ways to see how the body is working.
true jesus church
currently their churches are found in forty two countries and six continents.
followers of the church believe that god has only a divine nature, they therefore reject the idea of trinity.
there are now over 400 altogether.
pokémon red and blue are the first two games games in the series.
they are two of the best selling video games of all time.
pokémon gold and silver are the fifth and sixth games in the series.
the eighth games in the series.
the latest games in the series.
these are games not part of the main series.
he is often heard saying "d'oh!"
which has become an often used word when things go wrong.
when it goes into white blood cells it makes them fight germs.
the body controls this by changing
it is important for making things.
he also did not like the church and thought that people should be allowed to believe what they want.
however he did not like democracy either and thought that a country needed to be lead by a wise and strong king.
he also studied science and wrote a lot about people and places he knew.
when he died in paris, voltaire was not allowed to be buried in a church because he did not believe in the christian god.
it was about two brothers with the same first name who grow up together.
the important things in the environment that we value are called natural resources.
so his actions did not look as wrong in his society.
a tooth is one of the hard, white things in your mouth.
"chew" means to break up and crush food so it can be swallowed (pushed down into your stomach).
some animals also use teeth as a weapon.
most children have all 20 teeth by 2 or 3 years of age.
some people never grow wisdom teeth.
or they may have only 2 instead of 4.
the outside white part of teeth is called the "enamel".
this is the part that causes the pain of a toothache.
many people lose their teeth early because they do not do the right things to keep teeth healthy.
it can even kill the person if not helped by a dentist or doctor.
some even say it is the same language but with a different accent.
there are many diseases of nerves.
usually an injury is when the body or a part of the body damaged by something outside of the body.
many muscles pull on bones to make our arms and legs move.
this means it is the only muscle that we can choose to move.
we do not choose for our heart to contract.
as many as four game boys could be connected together with special wires for games with more than one player.
the stomach is a big sack between the esophagus and the small intestines.
the stomach keeps food after we eat it.
food we eat is mixed in the stomach.
then the stomach gives the food to the small intestine where most of the nutrition from the food is taken up.
one reason the stomach is a big sack is to hold all the food we eat at a meal.
then it can slowly give the food to the small intestine.
when food goes back up your esophagus and then out of your mouth, this is called vomiting.
most pain starts when part of the body is hurt.
pain is not just the message the nerve sends to the brain.
there are many locked doors inside that the player must open with the stars that they have collected.
each locked door leads to more levels, and to more difficult challenges.
the human ear can not hear certain sounds if they are masked by other sounds.
many people like to use mp3 files to copy music so they can listen to it on their computer.
their music has influenced a lot of bands and styles of music.
he is the brother of johnny winter who is also a famous musician.
hearing is one of the five senses.
the noun form of hearing may also be used to refer to a meeting, usually one where the public is invited to come and help decide something.
it is harder to hear a sound made farther away.
it is also harder to hear a sound when other sounds are louder.
the people and government of bhutan are proud of their culture which is based on tibetan buddhism.
voice is when someone is speaking or singing.
the sound of their voice can be heard when they are speaking.
the musical part of a song that is sung by a person using their voice is called vocals.
he was the oldest of twelve children.
the war caused madison to want a stronger government than he had before.
his father died at age 16.
he later studied law with thomas jefferson.
most of it was build in the 1970s.
the south of the province has many islands.
this is usually called a miscarriage.
humans also have the possiblity to end the pregnancy before the child is born.
a human child takes about 38 weeks to grow and be born.
these things may lead to the death of the unborn child.
in some cases finishing the pregnancy might be very dangerous to the pregnant woman.
bearing a child might also be very difficult for her.
in many cases, the woman is not even aware she was pregnant.
the pregnancy is only a few days or weeks old and the woman believes the miscarriage is just her menses.
where the mother or the doctors are aware of it.
these figures depend on the age and health of the pregnant woman.
when a baby is made, it gets 23 chromosomes from its mother and 23 from its father.
if it does not get the right number its development happens wrong (it does not grow right.)
most babies with chromosome problems will not live for a long time.
there are a few chromosome problems that babies can sometimes be born with.
this can be very little blood (less blood than a normal menses.)
it can be very much blood (much more than a normal menses.)
some women have bad pains in their low abdomen when they have a miscarriage.
this is sometimes like the pain of menses.
or a woman may have no pain at all.
if the pregnancy is many weeks old, the woman may see the fetus when it comes out.
but if it is less than 12 weeks old a woman may not see anything but blood.
in those countries where abortion can be done legally, it is often done by specialists who know a lot about the female organism.
there are less problems that can occur.
some people think a woman should be able to have an induced abortion if she decides that she does not want to complete her pregnancy for whatever reason.
some people think a woman should only be able to have an induced abortion if she will get very ill if she stays pregnant.
(some women have diseases that make pregnancy very dangerous, and there are rare cases of women who might die if the baby is allowed to grow and be born.)
some people think women should never be able to kill the fetus by having an abortion.
people also think these things because of their religion.
others think that an induced abortion, while not right, is still something a woman should be able to choose in order to control her life.
people who think a woman should be able to have an induced abortion sometimes say they are "pro-choice" (they think a woman should have the right to "choose").
people who think the unborn baby is a person and has the right to stay alive and not be killed by abortion say they are "pro-life" (they think an unborn child has the human right to life).
some people feel very strongly about abortion.
they think a woman can kill the unborn fetus in order to control her body.
some people agree, and are against abortion because they feel the unborn baby has a right to live, and the woman's right to control her body is not so important that she can decide to kill the unborn fetus.
one study looked at 13.000 women who had become pregnant even though they did not want to.
the person who oversaw the study later told media that given these results it would be very hard to say that having an abortion has no psychological effects on the womam who has is.
if a bad thing happens because of a surgery or medicine that a doctor gives, or because of a miscarriage, it is called a "complication".
there may or may not be problems getting pregnant again; this is still being researched.
she may think she has done something wrong that made the miscarriage happen or ended the life of the fetus, or she may feel intense grief at the loss of her pregnancy or child there are many places where women can get help dealing with these feelings.
even if a woman will die if she keeps a pregnancy, she cannot have an induced abortion.
a watch is a type of clock that is small and can easily be carried.
the amount of vibrations from a quartz crystal per second does not change.
the face of the clock is a flat disk.
it will often have the numbers one through twelve on the face to make it easier to read.
each hand shows the time is is named for and moves around the face of the clock one complete rotation for each movement to the next larger hand.
for example, the second hand moves around the face of the clock in 60 seconds.
when the minute hand moves all the way around the face of the clock (which takes 60 minutes), the hour hand moves forward one section.
the second and minute hands take 60 movements to move all around the face of the clock, the hour hand only needs 12 movements to do the same.
a small number of clocks will use sound to show the time.
the sound could be as simple as a bell or so complex that it sounds the same as a person.
they can also be used by people with mental problems that cause them to be unable to read other clocks.
not everyone agrees that some of these last terms are really sexual orientations.
in many countries and states, there are laws against having sex with somebody of the same gender, and people can be put in jail because of who they have sex with.
so that they could show happiness or fun in an easy way, people started making little smiling faces using some of the symbols on the keyboard.
smileys are usually used as part of a written message, but sometimes a smiley is just sent on its own to say "i am happy with your last message."
smileys are a useful way to show feelings to someone who cannot see the face of person sending the message.
the dance is very fast and you move your feet a lot.
blind faith was a rock group, that only were together for about one year (1969).
for over 30 years he has been a singer.
"what you do if someone does not understand your song, is to keep on singing your song."
doctors sometimes cannot tell if an intersexual baby is a boy or a girl.
it is not politically correct or kind, and people want the word to stop being used in this way.
there are many conditions that can cause people to be born intersexed.
doctors and parents may not even see that the baby is intersexed.
they may just think the baby is a boy.
but the baby has female chromosomes.
many of these are not bad.
they may not even be found until the child is in puberty or is an adult.
they believed that babies would have many problems if they did not have genitals that looked only male or female.
this was because surgery to make them look female is an easier thing to do.
when these people became adults some of them were very unhappy that doctors did surgery on them.
some of them do not identify with the sex that was chosen for them.
they may experience some to a lot of pain when they have sex.
they are happy that it was done when they were babies.
they think that if they had to be children with genitals that did not look like a boy or a girl it would have been bad.
the trouble doctors have is that they cannot tell when a baby is born if it will have a male or female gender identity.
if they knew this it would be very easy.
they say we should wait until the baby is older.
then the child can show us what his or her gender identity is
but some people in all of these groups are not happy when they are grouped together.
it also gets rid of waste after digestion.
the gastrointestinal system starts at the lips and ends at the anus.
food does not go through these organs.
the mouth is the hole in the face where we put food when we eat.
we use our mouth for many things.
the job of a deacon is different depending on the church he or she is a part of.
a deacon usually helps to run the church and teaches people about christianity.
they are not allowed to listen to confessions but are allowed to give out the ehuristic
he also wrote about women and marriage.
dinner is a word with a few different meanings.
in north america dinner usually means large meal that is eaten in early evening.
sometimes dinner can mean a meal eaten in the middle of the day.
the minimum number of course is often regarded as two but there can be as many as seven.
if there is only one course and it is the main meal of the day, then it is called dinner.
dinner is very important to some cultures.
she was born into a jewish family.
she was the fifth child of her parents.
this is where the liver from someone who has just died is put in another person.
the bile goes into the intestines and then goes out with the waste from your body.
this makes the person's body look yellow and is known as jaundice.
some diseases cause bad things to build up in the liver.
the liver is a common place to get metastases because it takes bad things out of the blood.
hemochromatosis is treated just by taking blood from people every 2 months.
if a person falls and gets a cut on their body, that person will bleed.
to stop the bleeding, the brain orders a special body part to go and try to lessen the blood flow, so that not as much blood is lost.
winter in the coachella valley is very pleasant, much like spring in other parts of the country.
the weather is so similar to weather in the middle east that the area grows more than 95% of the nation's crop of dates.
other people are not allowed to copy it unless the person who created it says that they can.
this is important because it means the person who created the work can sell what they created and get money.
so if someone watchs a movie, they are not allowed to write a story about the people in the movie unless the people who made the movie give them permission.
this only applies to the things that are known about by the person creating the work.
if a movie is made, but they do not go and see the movie, and then they write a book that has the same story as the movie, that is not a derivative work.
at each end of the field there is a goal made out of poles, shaped like the letter h in english.
there is also an area called the in-goal.
tackling in rugby means that they try to grab the other person and stop them from moving, or make them fall on the ground.
the two types of rugby moved away from each other because they did not agree about the how players were treated when they were injured while playing a game.
this idea was taken from the hebrew bible.
the two most important ones that it makes are erythropoetin and renin.
so this means there will be more oxygen carried in the blood.
it tells the body to drink more water.
this makes the body work better.
as long as it does not become worse, people may not even know they have it.
they may need special care from doctors to live.
they do some of the work of the kidney, but it is not as good as a real kidney.
so doctors have to give people erythropoetin so they make enough red blood cells.
a better way to do the kidneys' work is to give the person another kidney.
it is put at the start of another word to make a different meaning.
it can also mean a number that is put in at the start to show which number something is in a group.
sometimes people make up words by adding a prefix.
these words are not in a dictionary.
but if people use these words enough, sometimes they go into dictionaries.
this is not a word in a dictionary.
suffixes are letters put at the end of a word to change its meaning.
these places and buildings musn't be destroyed, because they are importent and that beautiful that the people in the future can enjoy this places.
these places are telling us a lot about the past.
the uluru for example tells us a lot about the culture of aborigines.
most countries have at least one place on this list, but some have many.
the idea of human rights comes from ideas found in religion and philosophy.
because people believe that human rights are important, countries make laws to protect them.
they make sure people who take away other people's rights are punished.
some of the important places that human rights laws are written is in constitutions.
these are united nations human rights "covenants": agreements between people or countries.
abuse means to hurt someone very badly.
but not everyone in the world believes in human rights.
if people who do not believe in human rights have political power they can hurt many people.
there are many people who work to protect everyone's human rights; some of these are government groups, and some are not with any government.
it is considered good by world governments to have citizens of different countries living together, since this encourages multi-culturalism.
this is a good thing because it can help avoid racism and intolerance.
a citizen is someone who is a member of a country.
people can be citizens because they were born in a country.
if someone was born in one country but became a citizen of another country, they are a naturalized citizen of that other country.
in the 1940s, he moved to the united states and became a citizen of the united states.
someone who live in a smaller area like a city can also be called a citizen of that city.
today many people live in societies that can be hard to understand.
so some people look in their religion to see something that does not change.
they also want rules about how to act that do not change.
so they see their religion as this thing that does not change.
when people look at religion this way they see the ideas in the religion as "absolute".
this means that it is not possible for them to change.
people can be any religion and be fundamentalists.
some people who are called religious fundamentalists do not like that name.
they believe bad things about them like that they are not clever, they are not educated, or that they do not respect people's human rights.
some people who are called religious fundamentalists do not like that the term has these other meanings.
so they do not want to be called religious fundamentalists.
these ideas tell doctors how they should treat patients.
in all cases the sperm meet with the egg of a female and grow into a new organism.
for example a bee lands on a plant to collect the pollen.
many cultures around the world once thought or still think that semen has special or even magical qualities.
the way it looks and its nature.
what it is made up of.
a man with oligospermia or azoospermia is usually infertile, and cannot or finds it very hard to make a woman pregnant by having sex with her.
this means that it causes women not to feel depressed or sad.
if the person that the man has sex with touches the semen, he or she can become infected by the germs and pick up the disease.
one of the ways for a man to lower the chance of passing on an sti to his sexual partner is to wear a condom on his penis when having sex.
if the allergic reaction is very bad, the person should see a doctor, especially if she is a woman trying to get pregnant.
in such cases, it may be necessary for the woman to have a baby through artificial insemination.
unlike elementary schools, where students often stay with one or two teachers for most of the school day, middle school is usually the first time in which students change teachers after each class of usually about one hour.
students often study 6 to 8 subjects.
they will be taught by a different teacher for each subject.
this is a kind of terrorism.
in the middle of the 20’s the klan got smaller because bad leaders and so much violence.
after the second world war the klan closed again because of high debts.
in the latest years the klan still burns down churches where black people go.
this was a case that was decided by the supreme court of the united states which is the highest court in the us.
her father tried to get her into the white school, but the principal of the school refused.
a well is a hole that is dug into the earth to get water (or crude oil or natural gas).
it is important to be careful what rubbish is put into the ground near a well.
if something toxic is put in the ground, it could end up in the water from the well and make people sick.
then they put the honey into a honeycomb.
honey is sweet and can be used instead of sugar.
honey is first mentioned in the book of exodus, and is often associated with pleasant and comfortable things.
crackers can be eaten by themselves, but they can also be eaten with things on them called toppings.
regular cleaning of the room and its tools is done to keep everything clean and germ-free.
the only people allowed in the operating rooms are the doctors and nurses as well as the patient too.
the toppings people use are different in different parts of the world.
people who believe in heaven say that it is a place that is perfect (very "very" good and with no problems.)
they believe heaven is where people will go after they die if they have been good.
some people also believe in hell, which is a place where people will go when they die, if they have been bad.
they believe hell is a punishment for being bad.
ideas of heaven and hell are not the same in all religions.
this was because early people believed that heaven was a physical place.
heaven is the place where god lives.
it is another word for the spiritual world, because god is pure spirit.
heavenly just means spiritual, so for instance the kingdom of heaven is the kingdom of the spirit.
many people who believe in heaven today have ideas different from the bible.
this difference in what people believe has led to many arguments over abortion.
there are many different kinds of biologists.
some study fish and ocean plants.
the future is something that has not happened yet.
the past is something that has already happened.
the work the cells do is also the same or almost the same.
it is made up of different tissues.
the heart has valves that make sure the blood only goes forward through the heart.
so the heart is an organ made from different tissues.
it can also mean things other than feces, depending on the conversation.
it can be used as an angry shout.
the term comes from when prisoners were kept in one place by tying a heavy iron ball to their leg with a chain.
a recording of a person saying the name properly can be heard by listening to on the village website.
there is another long word and it is 30 letters it is "pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism," and is a certain kind of disorder.
people have to pay money to join the forums to talk with other people around the world.
parts of it are free and parts of it cost money to join.
he also has a battle cry for when he uses his thunderbolt attack.
most women must take a few months to adjust to the dryness.
after they stop their period they can no longer produce babies.
this is the changes that happen in a woman's body every month.
menstruation usually starts around the age of 11, even as early as 9 years old, and ends when the woman is too old to have children, but some women can still have children from the age of 50-70.
some women have pain in the low part of the abdomen when they menstruate, known as cramps.
the hormones that are produced before and during a period can also make a woman feel moody, or just strange.
most nightclubs are only open in the evening and in the night.
some nightclubs hire servers to bring drinks to people who are sitting at tables or in chairs.
many pieces of jewelry are made out of precious metals.
humans have made jewelry for a long time.
jewelry can come in many forms, worn on any part of the body or clothing.
jewelry can be made from any material.
if the potassium level in the blood is too high or too low it can cause death because the heart stops.
then fox decided to give them their own show in 1989.
there is a hole on one side of the camera where the light can get in, and this is called the aperture.
the amount of time that the shutter lets light through can be changed as well.
this also lets in more light or less light.
an observatory is a building that holds one or many very big telescopes.
too much light can make it so that the astronomers cannot see out of the telescope very well.
an epidemic is a disease that goes over a large area and lots of people.
if the disease spreads over the whole world, sometimes it is called a pandemic.
the 15 highest mountains in the world are in the himalayas.
it is used for tents and sails on boats and other places where a sturdy material would be good.
all the members of the group had stage names which replaced their real last names with "ramone."
this means that their temperature goes up and down with the temperature of the water and air around them.
the band members have stayed the same since they started in 1991.
the album sold a lot of copies and reached number 40 on the billboard top 200 music chart.
it talks about basic human rights -- rights that all people have just because they are human.
they are believed to be very smart.
they live in all of the oceans.
they can also see in dark places.
there are some small holes behind the eyes, and they are the ears of a dolphin.
they can know the direction of the sound very well.
they have two sides of their brain, which they use to sleep.
they will keep one eye open to watch for predators while they sleep.
pigs are usually eaten for food called pork and often made into bacon.
pigs often roll in mud to protect themselves from sunlight.
many people think that pigs are dirty and smell.
but in fact, they roll around in the mud to keep parasitic animals away from their skin.
wheat is a kind of plant.
it is used to make many things, like bread and pasta, by first turning it into flour.
the grass plant comes from the middle east.
they were the government in afghanistan until the united states forced them out of power during the war on terrorism.
a person who fears something does not want it to happen, because they think something bad will happen to them if it does.
if we did not fear things then we would probably be dead because when we fear something like jumping of a cliff, then we would probably not do it, so if we jumped off a cliff then we would probably die.
if we have a fear of jumping off of the cliff then we would not do it so we would not die.
a tongue lets us taste because of things on top of it called tastebuds.
it is very flexible, so it also helps us eat and talk.
it is the language of israel.
the language was spoken by israelites a long time ago - during the time of the bible.
hebrew was no longer used as much in day-to-day life, but it was still known by jews who studied religious books.
it became the language of the new country of israel in 1948.
people in israel came from many places, and decided to learn hebrew so they could all speak one language.
five of these letters change when they are at the end of a word.
she helped france during the hundred years war against england, who then held more than half of france.
at the age of 12, she began to have visions of st.
she joined the army and led many battles against the english.
these documents are full of details, and have made joan's story one of the most complete and best known stories from older history.
his wife and his son andrew were standing in the room with him when he was shot.
this is how the city earned its name, because the land was owned by pioneer stephen frank.
over half of the grain that is sent by ship to other countries, comes first by barge through the port of new orleans.
their work is often very accurate.
in this storm, people knew several days before the storm that it would be very dangerous and very close to new orleans.
the special systems built to protect this under water city failed in several ways.
many homes were completely covered with water.
they spoke openly about this concern for many years.
after hurricane katrina, many people who lived in the flooded city are living in other places in the us.
many people are afraid to move back.
the people who cannot move back have spread to many other states.
texas is the largest state and has received the most flood victims.
the american school for the deaf is the oldest school for the deaf in the united states.
the winner is the person whose final jump lands the farthest from the line they started jumping at.
the big blind is twice as much as the small blind.
if the big blind was $1000, then it is said that the blinds are 500 and 1000.
this money is put into a place in the center of the table that is called the "pot"
the lowest amount that can be bet is the amount of the big blind.
limit games have a set amount that a player can raise at any time.
if more than one person raises, each one can only raise $10 more than the last raise.
in pot limit games, the most a player can bet or raise is the total amount in the pot.
with each bet or raise, the amount in the pot gets larger.
in no limit, there is not a limit of how much can be bet at any time.
it is the difference between the final bet and the first person's all in.
only the two players were not all in can win this pot.
if the all in player wins the hand, he wins the main pot (his money plus an equal amount from each other player) and which ever of the other two players had the better hand wins the side pot.
in an eight player game, it is possible to have several side pots with several people being all in at the same time.
the player is given a table and seat assignment, and a certain number of chips - the same amount as every other player.
these players are said to "re-buy" and the money they use to re-buy goes into the prize pool with the rest of the buy-ins.
creationists usually believe that life was created much as it is today, and that one form of life cannot change into another.
there are things that show evolution, such as fossils, the remains of living things that died long ago.
older living things seen in fossils are different from the life we see today, and can be put into order to show changes over time.
they also argue that the order is arbitrary because there is no place on earth where the rock layers are completely in tact.
it is played by blowing across a hole in the instrument, rather like blowing over the top of an empty bottle.
that means that once you have used up all your fingers for the first octave you can get the notes an octave higher by using the same fingering again but blowing a little harder.
the form of flute used in western classical music is blown from the side and has keys which are pressed with the fingers to cover the holes.
this has continued to the present day.
the flute can sound very bright and cheerful when playing high notes.
it can also sound very thoughtful or sad when playing in its lowest register.
it has no keys and is often made of bamboo or cane.
there are other kinds of flute that are played by blowing into the end, like a recorder.
it is blown at the end, but is not like the recorder because it does not have an opening that guides the air across a hole that makes the sound.
in south america, there is a flute called a "quena" that makes its sound the same way as the "shakuhachi".
ocarina is a kind of flute that is not made out of a tube.
they added two small holes to the old kind of ocarinas.
the holes are covered by the fingers to make musical notes.
the front part of the body is made of a flat piece of wood, and known as the sound board.
it has a beautifully carved hole in the center which is called the rose.
later they were played with the fingers alone.
most lutes at this time had seven or eight sets of strings.
they can also be set up to show on a projector.
it is owned by time warner.
many of these characters have been important as an influence for many people who enjoy them
she is the one of the first and most famous superheroes to be female.
many people think marston was helped by his wife and based wonder woman on his mistress.
she can run very fast and she can fly.
in may 2005, whedon said that he would not cast wonder woman until he finished the script.
when he or she needs less than three attempts for a height, he or she can go to the next height.
when the athlete fails three times on a height, he or she is out of the competition.
the athletes are allowed to touch the crossbar but they must not knock it down.
after that he learned he had cancer.
a monk is a man who decides to obey a set of very strict laws or rules.
they usually do this because they believe in a religion.
monks think that by obeying these laws that they can live a very religious life.
if a woman is called a nun and lives with other nuns then the place where she lives is usually called a convent.
they once said that other bands have trouble making long songs.
most of dream theater's music is very difficult to play because of the high speed it has to be played with and the complex rhythm.
some people think that this is mainly used by the musicians to show how good they are, whereas others think that the music they play is simply beautiful and needs to be so difficult.
it has three straight sides and three points.
feminism is about changing the way that people see men and women.
feminism started with the idea that human rights should be given to women.
many women felt very strongly that they should be allowed to vote and there were many protests.
some women even committed suicide to show how wrong it was that they could not take part in politics.
however, not all religious people think this and some feel that god created men and women to be equal so that feminism is actually a very good thing.
they also have large tusks that they use to defend themselves from predators.
in daytime they will sleep in the mud and water, but at night they come out to eat grass.
a prefecture is a word used by countries such as greece and japan.
it is a smaller part of a country with its own government.
it is a common year starting on friday.
in many mammals, the children have a set of baby teeth that fall out.
animals that have baby teeth and adult teeth are called diphyodont.
it is called the white house because it is white in colour.
carlin was famous for making a list of curse words that people should not say in the media, or even in public.
he died of heart failure at age 71.
carlin had a history of heart problems and had suffered several heart attacks.
who traveled to many different parts of the world.
most of the people killed by katrina were thought to be from drowning.
the body is made out of wood.
saint anna gave birth to the virgin mary, and mary grew up and gave birth to jesus.
anna heard and prayed and sacrificed like mad.
an angel came to anna and told her that god would grant her a baby.
the angel went to joachim too and told him the same thing.
anna had the baby soon after.
anna continued to keep her promise.
when mary was about three years old, joachim and anna brought her up in the second temple.
the second largest city is pokhara.
he lost one of his legs to cancer at the age of 18.
people still hold runs for him.
it usually happens when the tooth is being hurt by tooth decay.
it can be kept for a longer time than normal bread.
you can find them where people work with tools, like houses that are being built.
it is smaller than a rock or boulder.
hot spots can be found in some public areas, sometimes for free.
this means it is very very small.
the air going in and out of the mouth or nose when animals "breathe" is called the "breath".
they used to be made of wood and metal, but now they are made of lighter materials.
a baby is a very young child.
a child is a newborn till a month old, a baby until he or she is about three years old, and a preschooler between 3 years old and school.
an adaptation is anything that helps a living thing survive and make more of its own kind.
at other times these places can get lots of rain.
these roots take in water quickly after a rain.
it can reach water when the soil on top is dry.
a desert is a very dry place.
there are not many animals in the desert, but some animals have learned to survive in various ways.
rattlesnakes do not have any body heat of their own, so they use the hot desert sun to warm up.
it gets its name because at the start of every hour, the small doors on the clock open up and a little wooden bird comes out of the door.
the clock then makes a noise which sounds like a bird call ("koo-koo" or "cuckoo").
the clock makes the sound one time for each hour it is.
whether it is morning or night does not change the number of times the bird makes the sound.
this dog is great with children.
they like the water no matter what temperature outside as their coat protects them.
as a pet, they can be demanding of attention and are best suited in a home where they can have a daily workout.
this is one of the reasons why she was replaced in 1990 by john major.
search and rescue is also done by many fire departments.
there are firefighters in cities and towns who fight fires in houses and other buildings.
they usually only work in the summer.
firefighters must wear heavy clothing which protects them from the heat when they are fighting a fire.
in recent years young people have started to use the word "random" even more loosely to describe anything which is rather strange or has no logic.
there are two ways to make them.
there are two countries in the world that are called china.
although few people in taiwan want to be reunited with communists' china, almost none of them want to give up their ideas of freedom,and they would not forget how and why did they fight for it.
a man called moshoeshoe brought several of the groups of people in the area together and formed a new country with him as its king.
hamilton's mother had a child from a previous marriage that she left behind when she moved to nevis.
one must ask for the bill, or cover the glass, if you do not want more beer.
a medical doctor needs to talk with the person and other people who know him or her well, to watch how the person moves and behaves, and to learn about the person's past.
when people talk to each other, they use spoken words to communicate.
so while people are talking, they are also looking for signs in the other person's face and the movement of their body to tell how they are feeling and whether they mean exactly the same as their words are saying.
he called them "little professors" because he thought that they were clever and wrote a book about them.
she is known as one of the first people to use electric instruments to make music.
it is not the same as a not then an and like this: formula_20
she is such a know-it-all and so bossy that the boys do not like her at first.
he is number six in a family of seven children.
the reason why he was left on the doorstep of his aunt and uncle is that both his parents are dead.
he is so evil that people are even afraid to say his name.
joanne rowling then gives the reader a picture of the school that is to be harry's home through seven books of the series, each one of which deals with a year in his life.
even though the students learn magic and use magic, the book also describes harry's growing up in a new and strange situation, just as any student must learn to fit in when they go to a new school among different people.
if it were to fall into the hands of lord voldemort, it would be very dangerous indeed.
this was the first time he had a taste of being a celebrity.
aramaic is a language that is 3000 years old, or even more.
it is part of a group of languages called the semitic languages.
some old kingdoms used aramaic language for business.
aramaic is the language of big parts of the two bible books of daniel and ezra.
it is the language of the jewish talmud.
most people think that aramaic was the language of jesus.
aramaic is spoken today by small groups of people.
it became the most important language in the middle east.
small groups of people still speak aramaic in different parts of the middle east.
the wars of the last two centuries made many aramaic speakers leave their homes and go to live in many, different places around the world.
aramaic is not one language without any changes.
these different types are called dialects, but some of them are so different that they are like different languages.
the division between them is around the line of the river euphrates.
only special teachers learn old aramaic.
"middle" aramaic is the group of dialects that people do not speak every day, but they use them for special things like writing and religion.
libya is a country in north africa.
people from libya are called libyans.
most of them live near the coast.
only later does he or she become a conscious member of a religion.
the population density of a country or city is a way of showing how crowded that place is.
in recent years, many greyhounds have been mistreated or killed especially after they get too old to race, but many rescue groups try to stop that and to help them be adopted by people to keep as pets.
this means that the country of great britain ruled the united states.
they did not want their lands to be colonies.
jefferson writes of the rights of people and the role of government.
there are many things, for example they put people in jail with no reason, made taxes that were too high, and did not give respect to people who lived in the colony.
jordan is a country in the middle east.
it also has a very short coast on the red sea, and a longer coast along the dead sea.
most of jordan is desert and the country is very dry.
the northwest of jordan is its highest part, and its lowest part is the dead sea.
people from jordan are called jordanians.
the king is the head of state, but he does not have all the power in the country.
there is a small number of christians.
an israeli is a person who is a citizen of the country israel.
when a person is prejudiced, it means that they decide they like or dislike something without really thinking carefully about it.
the word "prejudice" is often used when people dislike another group of people that are different from them.
these are all serious prejudices which can lead to hatred or even war.
a loaf of bread will be more expensive than it was before.
so inflation means that more money will need to be paid for the same goods and services.
they worry about things that most people would not worry about.
or when they are driving, they might worry that they might run somebody over by mistake but not notice.
many people worry a little bit about these things.
but ocd can become a problem when it takes up a lot of time.
then they cannot do other things with that time.
then they feel they have to do more things over and over again.
we are not sure what causes ocd.
some people think that it is a problem with the brain.
some people think that it is something that people learn, which goes wrong later on.
some of the most common things people with ocd feel they must keep doing include washing hands, checking things, and buying or collecting a lot of the same items.
other people have thoughts they cannot stop, which keep going around in their heads.
a regular doctor can set up an appointment.
the industrial revolution is the name historians have given to the period in history when there was a large and rapid change in the way things were made.
things could now be mass-produced instead of making them one by one and many people began to move from a agricultural based life to intercity.
some historians see the industrial revolution as finishing about 1820, but they agree this was only the start of change in the way we make things, which continues right up to the present time.
the slaves now became salaried workers who were paid for their work.
this is because most of the country is desert and very dry.
some places in the world can only be reached by ferry, because they have no roads or railways, nor any airports at which to land aeroplanes.
he visited the island in 1791.
soon after that some slaves were brought to rapa.
the highest of them is mt.
the most spoken language of the island is rapan.
microsoft has worked on vista for more than five years so there are many things that are new to windows.
he also writes all of the lyrics.
reznor started playing music when he learned the piano, which he started when he was five years old.
he was so good he could maybe have become a pianist if he had wanted to.
the state has a land area of about.
it was the 46th state to become part of the united states.
the people who live in the state are known as "oklahomans".
this is more than in any other state.
oklahoma has only been a state for a little over a century but its history is much longer.
also, the tribes were not happy that the federal government did not do what it told them it would do.
some tribes had taken control of several forts.
the newly formed state became an important place for the oil industry.
he was the main person responsible for making the u.s.
this caused thousands of farmers to go into poverty and forced them to move to other parts of the united states.
this is the most in the united states.
it was made the official song of the state in 1953.
many people think other people were involved.
the lowest point is little river east of idabel in the southeast part of the state at above sea level.
the state is also known for having more man made lakes than any other state in the country.
the southeastern part of the state usually gets less than in snowfall.
most of the state is in an area known as tornado alley.
the team said they would play their games at the ford center under the new team name oklahoma city thunder.
he is most famous for his song "seasons in the sun" which was a huge hit in 1974.
no cars are allowed on sark, if you want to go anywhere on the island you need to walk or go on a bicycle.
she was born in new jersey.
benches are long and often found outside, and more than one person can sit on them.
the other kind of measurement is fahrenheit.
it is still used often in the united states.
it can be stopped but it is very difficult.
the ussr denied it and still blamed it on the meat because of fear that they would be found out that they were making chemical weapons.
the number of people in the city is about 53,000.
the brothers were later found by a farmer who raised them.
people slowly started to believe in it, because they wanted to have peace, but they had to care for themselves too.
all of them were very popular.
when something is simple, it is very easy to understand or do.
the people in the western part of the state felt that they had very little power in the state's affairs, including its decision to secede.
this is more than any other state.
it shares a water border with new york.
they are in the ocean to the east of the state.
north carolina has many different kinds of weather in different parts of the state throughout the year.
most years there is less then one inch of snow in eastern north carolina, and some years there is no snow at all.
the mountains usually get 14 to 20 inches of snow each year.
the state sent about 125,000 troops to fight in the war and about 40,000 of them died.
the state flower is the lilac and the state bird is the purple finch.
it is a city in present day turkey
in the beginning it was called the church of christ.
the first visit is called the first vision.
it happened in the spring of 1820 when joseph was 14 years old.
he had decided to pray about which religion to join.
in the bright light, he said that he saw god the father and jesus christ.
they told him not to join any church, because none of the churches had all of the truth.
they also told him that they had work for him to do.
part of the work that joseph did was translating the book of mormon.
joseph said that an angel named moroni visited him and showed him where a very old book was buried.
it was buried in a stone box in a hill near joseph's home.
moroni visited joseph once a year for four years until he told joseph to take the golden plates.
he did this with help from god.
it also teaches many things about jesus.
to members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints, the book of mormon is a special book from god just like the bible.
mormons believe that by reading the book of mormon and the bible, people can learn how to get closer to god and how to find happiness in life.
this book is also the reason church members are sometimes called "mormons".
mormons believe that it is important for families to spend a lot of time together, and that after they die, they can live together forever.
they meet once a week on sunday for church, where they have the sacrament and listen to short talks or sermons.
they also have sunday school to learn more.
the church also has activities during the week.
these are the most holy buildings in their religion.
after a temple has been dedicated, only mormons that are living good lives can go in the temple.
some of their beliefs are different.
it is the second largest church to call themselves mormons.
the official church of jesus christ of latter-day saints says that a man should only marry one woman.
a man could be married to more than one woman at the same time (called polygamy).
when the church changed its position in 1890, some people left the official church and continued with polygamy.
these groups are very small compared to the official church.
one way to stop socialism was to make the working class happy.
if we had the distance at 1 second and the distance at 2 seconds, we would still only have an average, although it would probably be more correct than the average for the whole race.
this was a very long and hard process and had to be done each time people wanted to work something out.
they then chose points on either side of the point they were interested in and worked out tangents at each.
a socialist country is a country where the government or the public as a whole has control over the economy.
gein is considered by many to be even more well known because of several movies that were based in part on him.
she was a very religious woman and was very protective about her boys.
she kept them away from women and busy with farm work.
he also made money by doing small jobs for people in the area.
he always went to the graveyard at the time of a full moon.
gein would take the whole female corpse or just the parts he wanted, put the dirt back in the grave and take home what he took from the grave.
he even dug up his own mothers corpse.
this was the reason he had studied anatomy.
he wanted to study a female corpse and learn more about its anatomy.
the closest he would get to changing his sex was dressing up in his full woman bodysuit.
police were not able to learn anything about what happened to her.
he later explained that he did not take it to commit robbery.
he wanted to see how it worked and planned to return it later.
that morning he had gone deer hunting.
when he got back, he saw that the store was closed with the lights still on and his mother was missing.
he had said that he would be back the next morning for antifreeze.
the house was dark and ed gein was not there when the police got there.
gein was there and was just about to leave in his truck.
the doors to the house were locked, but the door to the shed behind the house was not.
the legs were spread wide apart and there was a long cut from the genitals almost to the throat.
the place looked like it had not been clean in years.
the doctors thought that he loved his mother but he hated her, so that is why he killed older women.
many people became interested because of the true nature of the crime.
eventually the place was burned down by the plainfield citizens as they felt it as a place of evil.
he was buried in plainfield next to the graves of his family.
to find him she must get the help of an intelligent cannibal, dr.
he likes to kill women and make clothes of their skin.
some people who are not christians celebrate the beginning of spring on easter.
christians believe that jesus was killed on the cross about 2000 years ago by the romans in a city called jerusalem (most of which is in the modern country of israel).
the people who killed him did so because they believed that he was causing trouble for the government and because he was claiming to be god.
when they crucified him (meaning they nailed him to a cross), they even hung a sign over his head to make fun of him for this reason.
the day he was crucified is known by christians as good friday.
later, jesus is said to have appeared to them and preached to them.
it was because of this that his followers knew that jesus was god, just as he said.
a person can be agnostic and believe in a god or not believe in a god.
it also has a coast on the black sea.
because they are from the view of the character, a player can only see his or her hands and weapon.
the bios can be compared to the part of your brain that tells your heart how to beat.
they live where it is cool and wet.
they come from a little box that grows up out of the moss.
a function in mathematics is a rule that tells a person what to do to an object in order to get a different object.
the person is doing something to formula_4 that will make it a different number.
in this example, the person is adding 1 to the unknown number formula_4.
its official name is the state of eritrea.
it also has a coast on the red sea.
the land area of eritrea is 121,320 km², and it is one of the smallest countries in africa.
they send money home to their families.
most of the rest comes from farming.
many different countries have ruled the land that is now called eritrea.
this was the reason for a long civil war between the eritreans and the government of ethiopia.
the rulers of ancient egypt helped all of these things by keeping their people happy with religion that made them respect the rulers and their past.
they were bad about how they used their land though, so they used all the healthy land and made it unhealthy.
this period of time is called the predynastic period because there was no person ruling all of egypt.
the real history of ancient egypt starts when the two kingdoms came together around 3000 bc under a ruler named menes.
menes was the first pharaoh of egypt, and he made egypt a very safe and happy place.
people have a lot of different ideas about where the first egyptians came from.
some archaeologists have looked at the teeth of ancient egyptians and think they might have come from southwest asia.
they stayed basically the same for a very long time--there were 42 of them, and each was ruled by a governor called a nomarch.
this person was put in power by the pharaoh.
the person who watched the tax collection was called the "vizier", and every tax collector in egypt had to tell him every day how many taxes they had collected.
a lot of rich egyptians paid poorer people to do this for them.
there are 24 sounds in the language.
the easiest way to see how good they were at medicine is to look at mummies, because it shows that the doctors could remove organs without ruining the body.
because of this, also, we know that egyptians knew a lot about how the human body is laid out.
another famous ability of the egyptians was glassmaking.
alexander the great
he was born in the city of pella and his father was the king philip ii.
he was taught most of his skills in athens during his childhood.
he is known for his military skills.
he was taught by a great teacher and world famous philosopher named aristotle, and through his teachings he became the world's first great military commander.
the name comes from a governor of new south wales, sir thomas brisbane.
they shave their heads, because originally most of them were workers in factories and they had to be bald, so their hair could not get caught in the machines.
it also has a coast on the red sea.
many other languages are spoken in different parts of the country as well.
a civil war is a war that takes place between different groups in one country.
while civil wars can take place for lots of reasons, there are two reasons that are very common.
the first is because the different groups disagree about who should be in charge, or how the country should be run.
if two political parties disagree about the result of an election, this might lead to a war if the two sides cannot or won't come to an agreement.
the second is because one group of people does not want to be part of the country anymore.
this is known as a war of secession.
lots of people living in a certain area might decide that they want to break away, and make their own country.
very few national leaders would be happy to give up land that is part of that country, and a war could result.
sometimes the people who want to break away do not necessarily want to form a whole new country, but they might want more control over their affairs.
this happens sometimes when different ethnic groups belong to the same nation.
a civil war might start between two sides, but groups might break up and the new, different sides could start fighting each other.
groups of people who weren't involved at the beginning can easily be sucked in, as they start getting weapons to defend themselves against both sides.
civil wars with many different sides all fighting each other have occurred.
they are considered to be living fossils.
while crocodiles spend most of their time in water, they can come out and move around on the land.
they can hold their breath for a long time underwater.
these other animals include fish and animals that come to drink at the river, like buck and cows.
while in the water they roll over and over, so that the animal is disoriented and finds it difficult to fight back.
you can see the fourth tooth in the lower jaw of a crocodile when its mouth is closed.
the name "crocodile" can also sometimes be used for any member of the order "crocodilia".
he was soon better than his teacher.
tchaikovsky was unhappy and unsettled as he was often separated from his family who moved several times.
he tried to comfort himself by playing music.
he spent nine years at the school of jurisprudence.
when he left school he had to get a job.
for four years he worked as a clerk in the ministry of justice.
he learned to play the flute and the organ as well as the piano and learning all about composition.
by now tchaikovsky was writing works which were to bring him great fame.
tchaikovsky was not interested in women and only married to try to stop people gossiping about the fact that he was gay (homosexual).
a few weeks after the marriage he ran away and never lived with her again.
another woman was to become important in his life, but in a very different way.
she was the wife of a rich man.
she loved tchaikovsky’s music and promised him that she would pay him a lot of money every month so long as he promised her that he would never try to meet her.
he was able to give up his teaching job at the conservatory.
this work is often considered his best.
five days later he suddenly became ill.
a lot of people in the city had a terrible illness called cholera.
exactly what happened will always be a mystery.
however the group were made to come off of the stage because they were very drunk.
after this members of crass decided to be more serious about what they were doing.
they decided to wear black clothes all of the time, whether or not they were on stage.
this was so that no member of the band would be seen as the group 'leader'.
they also made a banner that they hung up behind them when they were playing live.
this was because they thought it was blasphemous.
this was so that they could control what was on their own records in the future.
after that it can directly be used.
this means that devices that only need a little power can get it from the bus.
almost all punks are leftists, who believe that a country should share the products and food that it produces with all the people in the country.
most people see him as the person who did all the planning for the 11 attack on the united states.
quite a few people call him a terrorist.
many of them died on the voyage.
a few weeks later, they sailed up the coast to plymouth, and started to build their town where a group of wampanoag people had lived before (a sickness had killed most of them).
many people began to get very sick from the cold and the wet.
in march of 1621, there were enough houses for everyone to live on land.
it is also the largest city in that country.
uniforms are special clothes to show that a group of people belong together.
the uniform will help the people to feel a team spirit so that they work well together.
they may also help members of the public to know who they are, e.g.
in the army soldiers wear uniform.
it helps them to feel proud of their school and children from rich families and poor families all look the same.
other schools, especially private schools, may have a formal uniform, or they may be free to choose their own clothes so long as they are the school colour.
they wanted to join up with more french ships to make a stronger fleet.
so they decided that this was the best time to leave cadiz.
he also falls in love with julia, who hates big brother and the party.
they are not allowed to even think about them again, or else they will be in big trouble.
another thing they are trying to do is cut all the hard words out of the english language.
they are changing it to make it more simple so that people will not be too clever or think too much.
they are not allowed to have families.
other people who live on the outside of the system have more freedoms.
in other parts of the world, large wars are being fought to keep the people busy.
the sides in the wars sometimes change.
when this happens, they pretend there was no change and that the sides were always the same.
this means that all the articles will have to be changed by people like winston who are not supposed to think about what they are doing.
the only place he is safe is in his own mind.
soon he loses control over it as well.
he dies as only another member of the party.
it is the official language of oceania.
the party are trying to stop people from rebelling, so it destroys words like "freedom" and "love", saying that people can not think of it if there is no word for it.
in fascism, the country is considered more important than any one person.
a country under this kind of government is usually run by a person called a dictator, who has the right of total control over the government and people.
even though most fascists would agree in theory that the country is the most important thing, fascists in real life act like the things that the dictator wants are more important than anything else in the country or even human life.
instead, they usually work closely with people who already manage these things but use the resources to build up the army or other parts of the fascist state.
it is very important to fascists that all schools in the country teach children that the dictator is the most important person in the world.
all adults are expected to either join the fascist party or support it as the government.
it is always a big crime in fascist countries to speak against the leader or ruling party.
it is easy to break one stick in half.
it is very hard to break many sticks tied together in half.
fascists think that everyone following the same leader makes the country strong the same way the sticks are.
both things happened at the same time in italy in 1943.
fascist ideas were most common around the time of world war ii.
this can happen if he is touched sexually, or even if he is not touched – for example, if he sees a naked person or thinks about having sex with someone else.
a lot of people also believe that men with bigger penises are better at making their partners feel good when they are having sex.
this happens in the same way as an erection of the penis.
this is why it is very difficult for a man to urinate when he is having an erection.
a man can also become sexually aroused without being touched, for example, if he sees a naked person or thinks about having sex with someone.
it is also common for a man to wake up after a night's sleep to find that he has an erection.
how long this takes depends on the length and thickness of his penis.
for example, about 10% of all men in the united kingdom will have ed happening to them regularly at some time in their lives.
having erections is seen by many people as a very important part of being a man.
this can lead to him feeling ashamed and not as good as other men.
the matter is made worse because men often do not like talking about their personal problems with other people, so they keep their unhappy feelings to themselves.
it is not really known what causes priapism.
another study that also came out in 2006 in the netherlands found that out of 251 homosexual (gay) men who were asked, most felt it was better to have a large penis, and those who thought they had one were happy about their bodies.
a lot of people also believe that men with bigger penises are better at making their partners feel good when they are having sex.
a woman who thinks she may have clitorism should see a doctor.
this means that when people start taking the drug, they will want to keep taking more, even if it is making them sick.
if people use crystal meth, they may take too much and get sick or even die.
when a person is intoxicated, they can get hurt if they drive a car or a boat.
as well, when a person is intoxicated, they may do dangerous things, such as have unsafe sex with a person that they do not know, or get into a violent fight with a person.
this means that if a person starts taking the drug, they will want to keep taking it, and it will be hard to stop, even if the drug is making a person sick (ill).
the mother and father are parents.
a mother gives birth to the child.
this means it shares the british king or queen and has the protection of the british military.
this meant that whichever country controlled gibraltar could see all ships that came into the mediterranean sea.
the rock can be seen for many miles.
since it was in such a good position, it was the perfect place for the british.
in world war ii the people were taken to different parts of the world like jamaica so they could be protected from the war and also leave the rock for the soldiers.
this meant that it gave the people of gibraltar a large amount of self-government.
there is lots of support for different languages and for people with disabilities.
foundation level is where the exams just asks about the most basic teaching on the course, for those who have a hard time doing that particular subject.
the results are given out in the middle of august.
an empire is a set of lands or regions that are ruled by an emperor.
a writer can mean anyone who makes a written work or a writing, but the word more usually means people who write creatively or as a job, or those who have written in many different forms.
this list is only a few examples of the many types of writing there are.
someone that invents new ideas or methods on how to do things may also be called an inventor.
there are 8 living bear species.
they only have a very short tail.
on each foot they have five claws, which they cannot pull back.
they can stand up on their back legs.
seven wonders of the world
most of the wonders were built by the greeks.
seven natural wonders of the world.
similar to the other lists of wonders, there is no single list of seven natural wonders of the world, as there has been arguments over how large the list should be.
a daughter is the female child of a mother and father.
a son is the male child of a mother and father.
they are not dangerous to people.
they only eat plankton or very small fish because they have small teeth.
its official name is the state of qatar.
it is joined to saudi arabia to the south and all other sides of it are surrounded by the waters of the persian gulf.
qatar is quite a small country and has an area of only 10,360 km².
people cannot drink salt water because the salt in the water will make them dehydrated - their bodies will lose more water than they drink, and they may become sick.
salt water used for making or preserving food is usually called brine.
a person who studies how the ocean works is called an oceanographer.
it also can mean water that people can drink.
although to drink the water from the snow completely frozen first without a little melted is very bad for you.
he had the idea for the story after a group of bad young men attacked and beat his dear wife for no reason.
but he always found time to be kind to other writers.
there is also more evidence to help find the rapist if the person gets help very quickly.
many people say that people who are raped should see a doctor before they clean themselves, so they can get medical help more quickly and save the evidence.
they should also tell the police.
there may be bleeding inside the body.
doctors can give a woman emergency contraception so she does not become pregnant because of the rape.
this medicine can help if the person starts taking it less than two days after the rape.
they cause the mud at the bottom of the river to move and in these countries people hate them.
at the age of 16 he left home to join the marines, where he served 3 years as a radio operator.
the members were young men and women.
he made them believe his end of the world vision.
because of his violent and crazy behavior, the chance is small that he will ever be free from prison.
all of them live in the ocean.
they eat animals that ate animals.
most have a sharp point which sticks into the fish when it is caught.
there are lots of types of fishing hooks, and they all depend on how powerful they can hold the line and the size.
this is the way people catch fish for fun or sport; commercial fishing is usually done using fishing nets.
since then it has been a "gymnasium".
its official name is the kingdom of morocco.
much of morocco is in the sahara desert and so most people live in areas close to the coast.
the next largest part comes from moroccans working abroad and sending money home to family and friends.
they have five or more arms and can be more than three meters in diameter.
they do not have a skeleton or anything that could be compared to bones.
they do not have a brain.
they also do not have blood, instead they use sea water to pump things around their bodies.
all of them live in salt water, usually on the floor of the ocean.
occasionally, they might even catch small fish which are unable to get away from their attack.
they move by contracting moves of their bell, but they cannot decide where to go on their own.
another name for these fish is pilchard.
all of those fish are quite small and are related to the herring.
the fish are named after the island of sardinia.
they are strong and can swim very well.
the cub stays in the den with the mother until march, then they all come out.
they have to eat immediately after hibernating.
anyone who is singing is a singer.
a good singer will have to think of a lot of different things in a performance.
a good singer may be able to learn a song quickly, but it may take some time before they really feel it has become "part of them".
this means having lots of experience in music, including being able to read music and learning to make music with others.
some of the reasons that people sing are to express the way they are feeling at the time, or something bad could have happened that they want to share, or something good could have happened.
the reasons people have called him bad are because they blame him for millions of chinese deaths, and say that he was not skilled at running the government.
this kind of "party" is a group of people who think the same way about politics or their country.
this move was called the long march.
mao had many plans for how china could move forward in technology very fast and catch up with countries like the united kingdom and united states.
the second five year plan had some ideas that did not work the way that mao had wanted them to.
he wanted to change the way chinese people think about china, and even change the way they remembered history.
because of this, he forced people to change things very fast, even if they did not want to.
mao did not like it if someone talked about his ideas a bad way, but many people in chinese cities did not like mao's ideas because of the food problems.
there was also no freedom to do many different things when the communists were running the country.
to keep people from saying bad things about the communists and making groups of friends to try and get rid of him, mao told all of china's best and brightest people quit their jobs, and go into the farms.
that is the biggest number of people to ever die without a war.
some people disliked mao because he did not support family planning, and this caused too many babies to be born, making too many people in too small places.
this means that everyone is called by god to become a saint.
how it started and what it wants to do.
he said that god himself showed him what to do.
if we are aware of this fact, then we will be very happy always.
there they can be very close to him.
they do not have to become priests or monks to become a saint.
god wants them to become a saint by doing their ordinary duties and activities well.
before people gave importance only to prayers as a way of being close to god.
the work one does can become prayer.
they said he was doing something that is against the catholic faith because at that time it was believed that only priests and nuns can become holy.
what is also said about the organisation is that it has a very traditional view of the role of women in a christian society.
wrote a book in the year 2005, which went against these accusations.
another writer, massimo introvigne, said that opus dei is now being attacked by people who do not believe in god and people who think that god should not be present in the world of human beings.
these people, he says, do not want religion to come back to the lives of many people in society.
you can discuss these superheroes and more at the
show jumping is where a rider rides a horse over a set course of horse jumps.
not most every type of horse can jump well, just like not all horses are able to do well at horse racing or farm work.
they are horses that are quick to learn new things and act quickly when people give them commands.
all these qualities are necessary to win races or show jumping contests.
dressage is an event where horses do not jump, but must be very obedient to their riders.
there is usually a set pattern they must complete.
the soldier must take orders from a person in charge known as a co or commander.
each soldier is trained in a variety of weapons and equipment to carry out commands.
he was crowned as the emperor in 800.
he is known for using his sword, “joyeuse”, in each of the thirty years of war and the 18 battles he fought in.
the first was italy in the italian unification.
basically, he called it a place and not a country at all.
the people of italy remembered and longed for the glorious days of the roman empire.
for buddhists, meditation is used to calm the mind so that the mind can better see the cause of pain.
christians sometimes meditate by thinking about small parts of the bible, or by saying the words of a prayer to themselves over and over.
the peace prize is given out in norway, but the other prizes are given out in sweden.
the ear is the part of the body that lets people hear.
some animals do not hear through ears.
spiders have small hairs on their legs that they can hear with.
the rabbit has large ears so it can hear very well, which are used to listen for predators.
some types of elephant use their large ears to cool themselves in the heat of their homeland.
there are a number of different words for underwear.
a family trust paid him an income, so he did not have to work a regular job.
sometimes he lived in mexico and other countries, because he could live there in more luxury than in the united states.
burroughs began to write to work through his grief and feelings of guilt.
a police officer is a person who works for the police force.
a police officer typically wears a police uniform.
police officers face many dangers in their jobs.
a police officer's job is to make certain that people obey laws.
this is usually done in one of two ways.
police officers have special equipment that they may need to use at times.
police officers that are dealing with a riot will use a special shield to protect themselves and wear a helmet and other protective clothing.
police officers use many different way of transportation.
while doing their jobs, they may need different ways to move around.
these are cars that are changed in ways to help the police do their job.
most police cars have something between the front seat and the back seat.
this keeps the driver safe from any criminals they have in the back seat.
some police officers will just walk around.
this is usually done in areas where there are a lot of people.
police officers do not like it when they are called pigs.
a well known stereotype about police officers is that they like to eat donuts.
the dutch are the people who live in the netherlands, or those that come from the netherlands.
one can count all people living the netherlands as dutch, but this is often not the case.
usually you have to shake the bottle before using it, and after using, you need to wait for it to dry for a few minutes, which is considered quite fast.
then you can write on top of the dried fluid.
some think he might have been a doctor or a butcher because of how he cut and killed the women.
the north sea is on the east.
it tells us how words have changed over time, and what other languages they came from.
it is the child of a female horse and a male donkey.
the dead sea is a lake lying between the countries of israel and jordan.
it is almost nine times as salty as the ocean
the dead sea is very salty, which makes it impossible for most life to exist in it.
this is the reason for its name.
it usually has black fur, but its fur can also be colors from white to brown.
fur is the hair of mammals.
he was killed in a car crash at the age of 44 in 1956.
and the month of july comes from from his father/grand-uncle, julius caesar
a camel has a thick coat of hair that protects it from the sun.
a camel has wide, soft feet, so it can walk a long time in the hot sand.
even the water from the camel’s breath flows back into its mouth.
these form after 5 years of age.
a female can only carry a young at time, called a "calf".
when they are born, they can start running in only a few hours.
afterwards, the chewed food is swallowed and goes to the other parts of the stomach to be completely digested.
pieces do not move after they are placed, but surrounded stones may be captured and removed from the board.
many of the problems caused by this war were never resolved.
the child of a female horse and a male donkey is called a "mule".
the child of a female donkey and a male horse is called a "hinny".
the witch was named merope and she had an older brother and father that were very bad to her.
after she was pregnant with the baby, she stopped giving him the potion and he left her.
dumbledore comes one night to tell him that he has magic and invites him to attend hogwarts.
they take broomsticks and land at the top of one of the towers.
he also says he will not be coming back to hogwarts next year.
it is also the largest city in denmark.
and got city rights in 1254.
it is the largest city in nepal.
it does not have many industries.
copper is still its main export.
it used to be called dahomey and was a colony of france.
about 64% of dominicans live in cities and towns and 87% of people that are 15 years old or more can read and write (literacy).
the official religion is roman catholicism but there is freedom of religion.
the island is also wanted by haiti.
no people are allowed to live on the island because the u.s.
coast guard determined that the lighthouse on navassa was no longer of any value to the u.s.
he had often complained about wanting to start a band.
they stated that they were going to take a break for a while.
the doctor travels in his space-time-ship tardis, with which he can go anywhere in time and space.
as a time lord the doctor can also "regenerate", if his body is badly hurt and he dies.
because of this the doctor could be played by different actors.
this made it possible for the series to be filmed over a time of forty years without having to actually "change" the character.
it can travel through time and space.
because of this, the doctor could explain things to his companions, and at the same time to the viewers.
the daleks are one of the most powerful races ever in the doctor who history and are the doctor's worst enemies.
when they are about to kill someone.
they change their look over time.
the sea devills they lived when the dinosaurs lived until the moon came to close to the earth and they slept for hundreds of years.
the time lords are a group of people like the doctor with two hearts, they can change their bodies when they get hurt.
all of the time lords except the doctor and the master were killed in the "time war".
this was a big war with the daleks.
it has made him sad ever since.
the master is an evil time lord from the same planet as the doctor.
he knew the doctor when they were young, and they used to be friends.
he also uses a tardis, which is able to change into any shape.
he travels through time like the doctor, but usually wants to do bad things, and hurt people.
when this happens, they look different and they act differently, but they are still the same person.
they do this instead of dying, so that they can live longer.
a time lord can regenerate twelve times in total, when the master had regenerated twelve times he stole a humans body to keep alive.
a concentration camp is a place which a government uses to keep people who are either against that government or who it thinks are too dangerous to remain free.
sometimes these are called internment camps, where a large number of people are put in prison without a trial.
the people who are locked away in such a prison, are not usually yet found guilty of a crime, but may be politically against the leaders of a region, people who are of a certain race or religion, or non-military prisoners of war.
the families of south african men fighting against the british were put in camps to stop them from giving food and help to the fighters.
their houses and farms were burned.
anyone who was seen as a threat to the government was sent there.
these were meant to be prisoner of war camps with good conditions, but many men died from sickness or hunger.
this camp was not meant to be so bad, and the man in charge was later tried and killed for war crimes.
these people were forced to leave their land and were often put into camps where they could not leave.
they are usually found in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, but can also be found through out the cytoplasm.
he forgot some of his lines, and argued with the people who made the show.
he is famous for holding the role longer than any other actor, and his version of the role is probably the best remembered by many people.
three states use the term "commonwealth" because they called themselves that when the united states was first formed, but this is only tradition and they are still the same as the others called "states".
it slowly changes color from green to red as it gets more ripe.
they are also used to make ketchup.
they can be soft in the center.
it is harvested when it is fully ready to be picked.
pear trees grow on heavy soil.
it has a green or red skin.
a melon is a word used for a number of members of fruit in the cucurbitaceae family.
the vine on which it grows is eight to ten feet in length.
it can also be used to make jam and the juice can be used to make wine.
they can be eaten when ripe and when dried.
they are used to make dolmades.
the following list of top wine-producers shows the areas used to grow grapes for wine making
grapes of all colors offer benefits.
red wine offers health benefits that are not found in white wine.
it grows to about 3 m in height.
the seeds are poisonous and should not be eaten.
cherry is a fruit that grows on a tree or a bush.
it has long leaves that look like feathers.
the full span of the crown of the tree is 6 to 10 metres.
the tree has one or more trunks, that all come from a single system of roots.
the cherimoya is special because it can be grown in high places.
this means that the total amount of momentum in a closed system never changes.
this happens in such a way that the total momentum of the system remains constant.
it is in the south west part of the sweden, by the sea.
it is warm in the summer.
in winter it is not quite as cold as in other parts of the country.
a skull, or cranium, is a set of bones that make up the head of a vertebrate and keep in place all body parts in the head.
it is used for building large buildings in many countries.
a pseudonym (seu-do-nim) is a false name a person makes up and uses instead of their real name.
a pen name is a name an author uses in the place of their real name, when they write and publish things.
a stage name is a name an entertainer like an movie star or a musican takes in the place of their real or birth name, they might like this name better than their real one or it's easier for people to remember.
he wanted to be the first.
the people that first lived there are called "chamorros".
during this time the people on guam learned a great deal about the spaniards.
fought to get it back in 1944.
they want to be a more important part of america.
but the united states does not think this would be a good idea.
would have to give up some of the important military bases.
some people still want guam to be able to make more of its own decisions.
almost all of these visitors are from japan.
he died while he was the president.
he was in the republican party and believed that government should do as little as possible.
very few people think that his work as president was very good, and in fact he had a lot of problems with it.
there are often floods because of these two rivers.
he played with the yankees for most of his playing time which started in 1923 and ended in 1939.
the doctor told gehrig he had only a short time to live.
when he spoke that day he said he was "the luckiest man on the face of the earth".
he died less than two years later.
united states congress, which is a group of chosen people who decide the laws of the country.
state chooses two people from the state to work on the senate.
in most cases, both of these groups have to agree on the suggested law before it becomes a law.
in order to be a senator, a person has to be 30 years old or older, and has to be a citizen of the united states for 9 years or more.
fair use is the idea that it should be okay for a person to copy small parts of something another person has created, without breaking the law.
this person can let someone else own the things they make, sometimes for money.
the person that owns these things has a "copyright" for them, which means that person can decide who can copy their work.
if someone else copies that work without asking the owner first, that person is breaking the law.
the owner can take the person to court and try to get money from them because of what they did.
since a lot of creative work is popular, people want to talk about them, and they may want to talk about them on tv or in a book.
this might mean that they want to use a little bit of it when they talk about it.
since a lot of creative work is now on computers and on the internet, it is very easy to copy things and send them to lots of people.
this is a serious problem for people who want to grow crops.
crops are the foods that farmers grow.
if the soil has eroded, the crops will not grow very well.
the bottom corner of a garden, or some other place a distance from the house is a good place.
it also allows for the water to run away.
waste from plants that have died of disease is also bad.
the disease can spread to the plants that the compost is used with.
the water helps encourage the waste to rot and turn into compost.
the compost is ready when it smells like thick earth, with no smell of decay or rot.
there were fights between the students in oxford and the people who lived there in the early 13th century.
def leppard was one of the first hard rock bands in 1977.
some snakes are big enough to kill a full grown person, but this is rare.
his friends at school gave him the name "freddie."
at the age of ten he was named the school champion of table tennis.
he listened to anything he could find.
he soon got the schooling he needed to be able to help his music career.
he joined a choir and started learning how to play the piano.
that is very large for anyone, but especially large for a man.
mary still lives in that house and allows fans to visit the house on the day of freddie's death each year.
they were happy in a loving relationship of 6 years when it was learned by the media that mercury had aids.
every unit can move along the playing field, which is split up into squares.
the amount of squares a unit can move in one turn is different for each unit.
each unit has its own strength and defense.
strength is how much damage the unit can do to another unit.
defense is how much damage it can avoid taking whenever it is attacked.
they are known for their beauty and for the many languages spoken there.
this is because people interpret a passage in the book of isaiah of the bible in a certain way.
latin name for the morning star.
the reason people came to think this was a name of satan has been argued about for many years.
others believe that he was the best out of all the angels before he rebelled against god.
this way they could defend their whole kingdom.
when there was a war, all the people who lived near the castle took their animals inside the castle.
they stayed there until the danger was gone.
when the people inside were starving they had to give up and come out, which is called surrender.
castles were built for defense until about 500 years ago, at the end of the middle ages.
after that people still built very big stone buildings.
really they were just great big houses.
it is very light and bright inside, because it was built to have parties, not to keep out soldiers.
it has lots of snow and is very rocky
in the lower parts it is greener
other countries paid little attention to the killing.
he worked hard to do well in school, and went to college.
he got a job as a lawyer in 1823.
this made some of the people in his whig party upset at him, and they stopped him from running for president in 1852.
his father was also a lawyer who later became governor of virginia.
this made him the first person to get married while being the president.
he wanted to bring the two parties to work together, but instead this made him unpopular.
when tyler was a boy, he stood up against a very bad teacher, so he believed that people would not fight against their government unless it was for a very good reason.
some people thought that this meant tyler was not doing his job.
state and tried to make this happen while president, but it did not happen until a few months afterwards.
he had some friends in the democratic party who sometimes asked him for ideas, but that party did not like him enough to be president, either.
he is famous for his action-comedies.
his arms became caught in the material of the last canopy.
his head was forced to the side as he could not break his fall with his arms.
he comes from a big family, with five brothers and one sister.
people usually drink milkshakes with a drinking straw and from a tall glass or cup.
they are now all over the world.
many books were written about saladin, the things he did and the battles he won.
he lives and works in the united kingdom.
he started to make music when he was a teenager.
this was so he could be in a place that was closer to other people.
he still makes a lot of music today.
it is known for its color.
there are many different kinds of monkeys.
they can be kept as pets.
it can grow to about 1 m in size.
this group is called the apes.
they do not have tails and are bigger.
latin is still taught in some schools.
this idea came to him after the ascetic ways of the shramana teachers had failed to work for him and he remembered sitting under a tree as a child.
during this time he learned of his past lives and saw the past lives of other people.
during his enlightenment he pointed towards the earth as a witness of his enlightenment, he was offered to be free from nirvana but his decision was to stay on earth and teach others the ways of the buddha.
they work all around the globe.
this is because a very large number of english words come from greek and latin.
because the greeks became very powerful in the countries around the mediterranean sea their language spread very quickly.
alexander the great even took it into asia minor.
modern greek is often said to have started in the year 453ad.
he was known for his twelve-tone system
when he was grown up he had to do a lot of teaching to try and earn enough money to live.
in later life he went to live in the united states.
it took a long time before he was recognized world-wide as a great composer.
he taught them how to write twelve-tone music and they became famous composers.
if you look at the way composers wrote music at this time you will find that their compositions became more and more chromatic.
it became so chromatic that it was no longer in any key at all.
the audience did not like it at first and took some time to get used to the sound.
this is music which is based on a particular row of notes.
anglican beliefs range from the bread and wine becoming the actual body and blood of christ in the course of worship to the idea of these two being shared at holy communion only as a memorial of the life that jesus christ gave for all humanity on the cross.
the name anglican for this church comes from the latin word for english because the church started in england.
they did this to try to get as many citizens as they could to worship in the official church.
already, there are anglicans who have broken from the main churches to form their own separate groups of believers.
one is by a way of a knock out.
there are also things that may be hard for tux to get past.
glory in the heavens to god our lord
and peace to men who love christ!
in you we see the gentle redeemer.
you are the comfort and the refuge of
force and terror will not prevail,
but truth and love will reign.
a thousand palms and a thousand altars
mother and guide of the elect,
mother and guide of the elect,
a person does not need a lot of equipment to give first aid.
you need very good training to give first aid.
he is known as one of the early fathers of anarchism.
it allows people from around the world to have conversations together, but it can also be used to have a private one-on-one conversation.
the country is divided in parts.
most parts are states, but some parts of the country are not part of any state.
spring is the season after winter and before summer.
in many parts of the world plants grow and flowers bloom.
some planrts have changes some of their leaves to do other things.
those plants that have leaves can be sorted into two groups: those that have leaves all year round, and those that do not.
the leaves will grow back in spring.
they like to make reactions in which they give up this single electron and then have a charge of +1.
it is a very strong base.
he was born in the town of león and died in madrid when he was killed by a person using a gun.
he helped to fight against fascism.
it is almost 2000 years old and was started by romans.
it is just south of liverpool.
it is yellow and not shiny at all.
cherrywood tells the story of how the care bears come to help two children who do not care for anyone (kim and jason).
these rules can be quite simple, but there is no way for us to know what exactly the system will do in the future.
because the rules of the double pendulum are simple, it should know exactly what the pendulum does if known right where it is when started.
but it can never find the exact same position again, because it would need to be very much exact - a very small change in starting position that cannot even be seen, and the pendulum swing would quickly be different from what it was before.
very small changes in the starting position of a chaotic system make a big difference after a while.
this is the explanation why even large computers cannot tell the weather for more than a few days in the future: we simply can not know exactly enough what the weather is today!
when a bird or a butterfly moves its wings, it makes a small wind, and this wind can make a difference on the weather in a few weeks.
his ideas on chaos theory help other people by letting him imagine things that could go wrong, and warning the right people to fix it before they happen.
the only ones who can fight them off are their male soldiers.
there is a place for horse races in the city called pimlico.
each lock changes the water level to keep ships from getting stuck.
if a ship is too big to go through the panama canal it has to go around south america.
a tribe is a small group of people who live and work together.
a tribe can be a collection of families or may have families and individual people living together.
it is necessary to do work to keep people alive, and a tribe usually divides up the jobs that need to be done amongst themselves.
in today's world people think of tribes as being from a far distant time in the past when people did not live in cities yet and there were no nations.
there are still tribal groups in existence all over the world but their numbers are getting smaller and smaller.
he did this because he wanted to be better than god.
planning means a hiker should decide what he wants from the hike.
on no account should he go on travelling, if he finds out he has lost his way.
the first thing a hiker should to do is to find the about direction in which he was travelling before getting lost.
it has an oval shape, and is green on the inside with small black seeds that are edible.
they have a long sticky tongue which makes it easy to pick up many ants at once.
the sound is recorded on a very fine line or groove which goes around and around in a spiral from the outside edge of the disk to the center.
a theist is a person who believes in gods or in just one god.
they think that people are happiest when they give something to society.
they also believe that human beings can solve problems without help from god(s).
the walls made to keep the city safe are still there.
many say it because these nations were here long before canada, and to make it clearer that the first nations have many cultures, and that some of the cultures are very different from others.
it was used in the united states.
a "wing" is part of an animal that allows it to fly.
by moving its wings, the animal can produce lift and get off the ground.
they sometimes need special equipment (such
his father and grandfather sold wine in london.
he had about three or four children.
he did this job for 12 years.
they also eat other small insects.
they were known for being able to get shot by enemy fighters many times and keep flying.
people were gathering together all around istanbul.
before running for president, he came from new hampshire and had served in the house of representatives.
in the new system the sultan would keep all his male relatives locked in a small apartment called a "kafes" where they would never see the outside world.
this was to keep them from taking power from him.
this is because each mother in the harem would try to make her own son the next sultan, since they knew he would probably be killed if he was not.
it is an attack from the air.
also, the car did not live up to all of the promises in the advertisements before it was released.
even the name was a problem to some buyers.
was entering a period of recession.
it is one of only seven years to use just one roman numeral.
it is named for the hills that cover most of the city.
it is done at the winter olympics, and it has its own world championships.
the female form of gabriel is gabrielle.
he is a messenger from god.
he is the angel who tells mary that she will have a baby boy.
when the baby is born it is actually a girl, this is what many christians believe at the christ church in brandon, suffolk.
this baby is taken off mary as she has no food or money to look after it, one day joseph wins a bet at the local pub andwins a lot of gold.
they go to the homeless child refuge to buy back their daughter only to find she has been brought by an elderly man a few days ago.
mary leaves in tears and joseph uses the money to buy a young boy who had been in the refuge for many years, mary was delighted and named him jesus, (which means son of god).
it has its source in the rothaargebirge.
they will also protect other members of the pack, to a certain extent.
they may also judge "unattended" moves of a child as an attack.
one of these is the rottweiler.
this means that the dogs must be kept on a leash in most cases.
the reader is told that harry potter is an orphan, that he is a wizard and that he lives with an aunt, uncle and cousin who do not love him.
his good friend ron is the youngest of six boys and has a younger sister, ginny, who has a crush on harry, and who becomes important in this story.
usually they would never do anything to upset their owners.
but they have minds of their own.
because dobby comes from a different race to the human magicians, he lives by a different set of rules.
this enchanted tree is to be very important in a later story.
the reader never knows whether he can be trusted or not.
harry has not been back at school very long before it becomes clear that everybody inside the school is in danger.
luckily, he has listened to a really good bit of advice from the old professor, that help will come to him, if he asks for it.
sometimes they may have two processors.
it is north of the city of victoria.
the song tells about the 2000-year-old hope of the jewish people to return to their homeland, israel.
an eye still looks toward zion;
our hope is not yet lost,
the hope of two thousand years,
to be a free nation in our land,
the land of zion and jerusalem.
when the first cup was full of names, they made a copy of it, which is now what is awarded.
this movement can be started in either a country at war already or in a country that is newly entering a conflict.
he is sometimes called the king of the mountains.
he said that when he was 14 years old, he wondered which church he should join.
he went into the forest to pray.
when he was praying, smith said that god and jesus christ came to him and talked to him.
it was buried in a hill.
a few years later, joseph says that he received those plates and translated them into the book that today is call the book of mormon.
his wife didn't believe him and told him to test joseph the next day.
this way if joseph was lying, the new book would be different.
joseph said he needed to pray alone.
when he returned he informed marvin that god was very angry at him and will never let him translate from that plate again.
joseph smith said that god wanted him to be a prophet and teach other people the things that he learned from god.
thousands of people joined this church.
he also said that men could have more than one wife.
there were many people who did not believe the things joseph smith taught.
it is also the name of several important women in history.
there are different kinds of band that use different groups of instruments.
she is the daughter of frank sinatra.
he is best known for his song "when a man loves a woman".
he grew up in both places.
miss ossie was an old lady who used to take care of tommy from the very beginning.
when the young boy is killed, she decides to bury him in her backyard as a way to keep him around anyway.
this means instead of using their small eyes, they have special body parts they can use to find their way around by bouncing sound waves off of objects, like a radar.
they eat fruit and can see well.
they are famous for only drinking blood.
his work is considered among the most important in all of literature.
paul vi taught that prayer was very important today.
it also is the largest city in taiwan.
the head bones all together are called the skull.
it is made of small bones called vertebrae.
this part of the body is made of the sacrum and the two pelvic bones which are joined to it on either side.
at the bottom of the pelvis is a large opening, big enough for a baby to pass through.
the hands and feet have lots of bones and are joined to the arms and legs by small bones with sliding parts.
it helps the other system do what it needs to.
a community is a group of living things sharing the same environment.
he later joined the democratic party and ran for governor of the state of california in 1934.
kansas city is an important business center because it is in the middle of the united states.
99 names of god
this place is called the fimbria.
this can take hours or days.
it was made by david lynch who is known for his strange movies.
it is also considered a school book in some states.
they are joined at the pelvis and each one controls one side of their body, which means they have to do things together.
they have two stomachs and three lungs, and at birth they had a third arm in between their heads.
philadelphia is a large city in the u.s.
they were so popular that they were asked to come back again the next week.
it was only a little bit more successful than the one before it.
he said that he did not want to be part of a band where his friends were dying.
it sold well and songs from it appeared often on radio.
the rest of the band did not leave the house for a month.
they found it hard to work with him.
it also sounded more like hard rock than the band's earlier work.
they told the media it was "mutual" because the band members disagreed on the music they liked to make.
the quality of his life slowly improved.
it also took him a while to get used to playing music as part of a band again.
it sold over one million copies in the first week in which it could be bought.
it also had two new songs.
they first wrote 38 songs for this album.
they later changed their minds and decided to make one album with two discs, and 28 songs in total.
it was their first album to be number one in the united states.
he said this was because most of the band members had families.
erlewine agreed that the band had not done a lot of new things on the album, but instead did what they were good at.
they are not allowed to speak directly to the audience.
it is a kind of mammal.
they cannot walk backwards but they can hop or jump as far as about three times their own height.
it truly is the brain of the computer, since almost everything in the computer must use the cpu in one way or another to get its job done.
running of the bulls
it is done all around spain, but the most famous running of the bulls is in pamplona.
in most bull runs the bulls are not killed, and they live for a whole season.
red shift is a way astronomers use to tell the distance of any object that is very far away in the universe.
the same happens with light when an object that emits light moves very fast.
they can see what colors of light are coming from a star, and see what it is made of.
when they see that, they can tell how far away the star is, whether it is moving toward us or away from us, and also how fast it is going, since the faster it goes, the farther the distance the spectral lines are from where they should be.
in a rainbow, the colors of light go from purple to red.
no two chemical elements had these lines in exactly the same places along the rainbow, and they also soon discovered that could be used to be able to tell what stars were made up of in the universe.
it also tells them how far away it is.
it has five sides and it is white.
the beach boys
the term originates from the fact the first 6 letters of the top row of keys are q,w,e,r,t,y.
or the control or alt key can be used together with a letter.
since the speed of light is such a big number, this means that even a small amount of matter can have a lot of energy.
the problem is that antimatter is very very expensive to make, and is almost as expensive to store, since it cannot touch regular matter.
it also can be a person from the philippines who lives in the united states.
do not confuse it with canada.
the purpose is to find ways for the countries to form unity and to work together to figure out their problems.
the holy spirit is a part of what is known as the holy trinity in the christian belief.
when jesus came to earth, he said that it was better for him to leave so that he could leave with us the holy spirit as a teacher.
it is often believed that the holy spirit is the still small voice inside that help us determine right from wrong.
it is said that jesus was conceived of the holy spirit so it would make sense then that he would be what jesus left on earth after his death.
they go from 0 to 255.
it can also have several names.
so instead of 4 numbers there are now 16 numbers.
the island of newfoundland, and part of labrador, are in a time zone that is a half hour off from any other part of north america.
most people know that birds build nests.
it is still used in some parts of the world.
sometimes blind people will use an abacus, because they can feel the numbers easily.
it could support other things that could make it into a computer.
it did not do very well.
only 40 games were made for it.
it can also be a lesson that someone learns in a book or story.
it is usually one line at the end of the story ("the moral of this story is...").
the new year is an event that happens when a culture celebrates the end of one year and the beginning of the next.
bulbasaur has a closed flower on top of it, which opens when it changes into ivysaur, and then fully flowers when it turns into venusaur.
progressive rock bands write and play songs that change very much during each song.
at the moment there are un troops in kashmir.
rural is the opposite of urban, which means places such as cities where buildings and places where people work and live are all close together.
usually the world is shown as very different to bring more focus to the issue.
later he wrote two books about christianity.
1 5 10 10 5 1
for example, the numbers 1 and 3 in the fourth row are added to make 4 in the fifth row.
it is often used just because of its length, and not because of its meaning.
part of the reason for this is that antidisestablishmentarianism describes something that people no longer talk about very much.
it is very often used to describe those who do not want the church of england to stop being established.
this story of a white boy who helps a black man escape slavery in the southern united states is known for its humanity.
he has to do many challenges, including fighting a dragon and going through a maze.
people whose brothers or sisters have the disease are the most likely to get it.
the top of the mountain is mostly covered by snow and glaciers.
large groups of people attacked people who were even thought to have the stamps.
the law was changed in 1766.
other battles were also fought before the war started.
they were not going to change their views.
it also gave all the land it said it owned which was west of the appalachians as far as the mississippi river to the new country.
the town is very old and dates back to around 700 ad.
it is a new town and building began in the 1960s.
the town is very old and dates back to around 800 ad.
the only large town is ludlow.
it is also the largest and most powerful member of the "felidae" family.
a cassette is a small box which is made for putting inside a bigger machine.
cassettes are still the main way to listen to music in many other countries.
it first started in 1964 and it ended in 2006 because not enough people were watching it anymore.
it has people of many different races and religions.
by law, gays cannot enter into the country and being a homosexual can be a reason to go to jail.
the people in the country are famous for their music.
through the night and for several days after, there were smaller eruptions.
these features do not last long and break down soon after they are formed.
after the romans left and the anglo-saxons moved in in the seventh century, the name changed to exeter.
if the president agrees the bill should be a law he or she signs the bill.
he fought at the battle of princeton.
each player moves pieces around a board from one side to another.
players roll two dice to find out how far their pieces can move in one turn.
the winner is the first to get all of his or her pieces all the way around the board.
it is an important city of south america and the entrance to peru.
he called it the city of the kings.
it has a very large population, and is the largest city in peru.
a theory is an idea that someone has created to explain something.
only after many tests to try to find out if it is wrong (to try to prove or disprove the theory) can a hypothesis be called a real theory.
the north and east parts of the country have many mountains, and part of the south part is the gobi desert.
it is about a trip through the afterlife.
sometimes a person who is very good at their job is called an artist, even if it is not considered as art.
one of the books was burned by the nazis.
they believed some of the gods wanted every part of their sacrifices burnt, not just one part.
it is one of only seven years to use just one roman numeral.
a sauna is a small room or building that is made hot.
this is believed to help people be more healthy.
today many countries and groups of people have different ways of heating and using a sauna.
the heat can be more than 100°c.
many people believe that this is because of something that happened in the war.
they kept him warm by covering him with fat and wrapping him in felt.
however he later said that he piloted the plane before the crash and was rescued by tartars who wrapped him in felt and fat to keep him alive because there is no denyng that his wounds were serious.
beuys became a member of the group but he was more interested in performances.
he believed that art has a larger role to play in society.
his first problems with politicians were when he lost his job as professor.
he was one of the first members of the green party in the 1980s.
it is well-known all over the world by its most famous members like joseph beuys.
it was home to the u.s.
he left instructions in his will that his money should found the nobel prize.
he died two weeks after adding the part founding the prize in his will, he was always great at making dynamite.
he always wanted to show the peaceful uses of explosives.
an algorithm is a step by step list of directions that need to be followed to solve a problem.
the instructions should be simple enough so that each step can be done without thinking about it.
it tells what ingredients are needed to make the dish and what steps to follow.
if the recipe tells exactly what to do without too much confusion, then it is an algorithm.
there is usually more than one way to solve a problem, there may be many different recipes to make a certain dish which look different but end up tasting the same when all is said and done.
the same is true for algorithms.
when we look at algorithms as a way of solving problems, often we want to know how long it would take a computer to solve the problem using a particular algorithm.
when we write algorithms, we like our algorithm to take the least amount of time so that we can solve our problem as quickly as possible.
the thing that measures how
when we ask how complex an algorithm is, often we want to know how long it will take a computer to solve the problem we want it to solve.
people kiss each other by touching each other's lips and their mouth.
the meaning of kissing is different in different cultures.
there are different ways of kissing.
it involves touching each others tongue while kissing.
diseases can be spread through a kiss.
it is possible to spread diseases through kissing.
people go there to buy sex for money.
it would also fill money into the public purse.
the latitude of the earth give the distance north and south of the equator.
there are now 20 - 30 animals left in the wild and 50 animals in captivity.
in the 1900s there were 200 left in the world then because they were considered pests lots of them were killed.
it is very limited and can only be bought with a new computer.
the country has a small area and not many people live there.
he is one of the richest people in the world, because he owns a lot of oil.
the weather is usually nice during the day and cool at night.
this tragic moment brought with it terrible consequences: one of the most remembered one is the "bogotazo".
thus it is possible to see that earth's distance from the sun does not cause the season to change.
it is a property of the united states.
that means people are not allowed to live on the island, only animals are.
garbage is what someone leaves behind that they do not want to use anymore.
it can also be called waste or rubbish.
a definition of garbage is anything left behind at a place where you used to be, but are not anymore.
both sides said that they were attacked first.
also, many of the officers who would lead troops in the american civil war fought in the war and would use their experiences in the coming civil war.
in some places they are called spring of nations or the year of revolution.
the people of the countries tried to take over their governments.
he used to take his compositions to school, but the teacher did not show much interest in them.
he did not like the discipline of the conservatory course of study, but he still got very good grades.
many of the pieces from this work became very popular.
they moved into the house in 1885 and grieg lived there for the rest of his life.
they continued to travel and give concerts.
during his last years he received many honours.
at his funeral thousands of people went out on the streets of his home town to honour him.
this can be heard in his songs and some of his instrumental music.
he started out as a engineer but then moved up the ranks.
isaiah is also the name of a book in the old testament, which tells the story of israel in his time.
it flows through the city of edinburgh, and it flows into the sea.
the other way to write inuktitut is by using an abugida, which is a kind of alphabet which has letters based on syllables.
the uses a small part of the unified canadian aboriginal syllabics, a set of letters made up for writing down many of the languages of the first nations people in canada.
fall out boy
the main change was that some of the phoenician letters that were for sounds not used in greek were turned into vowels.
another change is that some new letters were invented for sounds in greek but not in phoenician.
there were some differences in the early greek alphabet depending on what part of the greek world it was used in.
the only difference between them is the last song on the cd.
it is owned by the united states.
the island is an animal refuge (no people can live there so that animals can be safe).
storms sometimes form before and after these dates but most storms form during the season.
there were 28 storms that were tropical storms and 15 that were hurricanes.
for the first time ever storms were named by the greek alphabet as the normal name list had been used up.
for example, it can be used to find out what day easter will be on, even though it is not the same in every church.
girls go through puberty from about age 10 to age 18, boys from about age 12 to age 20.
some people get hair on their chest or their back.
this means that the voice will get deeper.
when she was 12 years old, she passed a test so that she could compete against adults.
karen was like a best friend to michelle they did almost everything together
he came out best in all three aircraft carrier battles in which he fought -- there were only five such fights in of all history.
his acts were completely his own, because there was no such thing as carrier fighting experience before him to learn to fight ships from the air.
this club is named after her.
she now lives in new jersey.
many people lost their jobs and became homeless during this time.hobos are people how have holes in their clothes too.
it is believed to be based upon the beliefs of ancient peoples who lived in the uk before they all joined the religion of christianity, but a lot of it was created in the 1940s by a man named gerald gardner.
a group of wiccans who worship and do magic together is a coven.
there are a lot of different kinds of wiccans.
there are some wiccans, called dianics, who also believe there is both a goddess and god but choose to work with only the goddess.
they ask their god and goddess to help change their lives, or the lives of other people.
this magic is often called witchcraft, but a person can do witchcraft without being wiccan.
the meaning is to think about how your actions will affect not only yourself but the world around you
he became the leader in 1984, and ruled for 13 months until his death in 1985.
they learn new things very quickly and remember them well.
it can be in thinking something will happen.
they are sometimes called alsatians because they come from an area called alsace.
they are often used as police dogs, though they have many other uses.
it is said that the word "googol" was chosen to represent this number because it sounded like baby talk.
the team at the top of the list (called a league table) is the best team and the team at the bottom is the worst team.
the six teams in each conference are listed in order of how well they played in the season.
this is called seeding and it is done to make it easier for the better teams to win.
the teams that did not win their leagues (the wild cards) are always the fifth and sixth seeds in the list, even if they were better than a team that won a different league.
we will rock you
to be working
to have written
to have been working
to be written
to have been written
there are also numbers which are not real.
that means that there is no first or last real number.
no matter how many real numbers are counted, the last one will never be reached.
that means that if two different real numbers are taken, there will always be another one in between them, no matter how close together the two numbers are.
this makes the real numbers special.
there are more real numbers than there are numbers that are not continuous, even though the numbers that are not continuous might be infinite, too.
sometimes it is taken as part of the group to be considered, and at other times it is not.
if a square is drawn with sides that are one unit long, the length of the line between its opposite corners will be formula_1.
proof that the square root of 2 is not rational.
the prize is given every year.
it is just above of the equator.
it belongs of the united states.
no people can live on the island because it is for animals only.
another word for this is intersex.
sometimes when these people are born, it is hard for the doctor to tell by looking if the baby is a boy or a girl.
if a baby is born intersex, the parents can decide to have the baby get surgery, to make it look more like a boy or more like a girl.
some people think this is not a good idea, because the surgery can make it hard for the person to enjoy sexual intercourse when they are older.
but others say that the baby's life will be too hard if it does not get surgery, because it will be different and other people might be mean to it.
when sperm are first made and fly to the head, they are not yet ready to be ejaculated.
in humans they are often called breasts.
he is well known for his footwork.
it is in the western part of the state on the eastern edge of the black hills.
year without a summer
the year without a summer was 1816.
people who control government work there to make laws.
the building may have many offices.
a smaller government like one in a county can be in a court house.
a city government can be in a city hall.
that means that it has the most people from different kinds of places, religions, and ethnic groups of any place in the usa.
large parts of queens are urban and an equal part is suburban.
queens has a very large bus system that goes to all parts of the borough.
it took 13 years before they won the cup again.
a large fire burned almost 10 percent of the park in 1999, but the animals and plants have come back and are now doing fine.
it is in the area called red square.
the building itself is made up of separate chapels.
from the end of the middle ages until the year 1974 monmouthshire was a part of wales for some things and a part of england for other things.
however, some people who listen to them a lot think they are not so hard to understand.
a clique is a small group of people who like the same things.
the word is also used to talk about groups of adults, usually groups of politicians.
it makes people to want to smoke more even if they do not like the taste or its other effects.
the smoke also includes other things that are bad for people's health.
no one knows what the fourth message says yet.
not very many people have seen kryptos, because only a few people are allowed to go into the cia building.
they do very important work at the cia, and have to be very careful.
it has thousands of letters and other things written in the metal.
he learned the answers in 1999.
some of them have secret messages.
there are two copies of antipodes.
one belongs to a man in california.
there is a famous book that talks about kryptos.
the book was written by a man named dan brown.
on the cover of the book is art.
a large amount of the u.s.
a person born in nigeria is still nigerian even if he or she comes to the united states and lives here for the rest of their life.
an urban area is an area where many people live and work close together, usually in a city.
it is where buildings are close together.
a convertible is a car with a roof that can be removed or folded down.
they put on an act to get his attention.
it is often used as fertillizer, which makes plants grow more quickly.
a cycle in a wave is from one point to the same point as in from crest to crest.
for example, if the train was moving at 10 miles per second, and 10 train cars passed in one second, then each train car would be 1 mile long.
if the other train was also moving at 10 miles per second and 20 train cars passed in one second, then one would know that each train car was 1/2 of a mile long for that train.
the movie centers around what happens between a young white woman and her parents after she falls in love with a black man.
bringing up baby
a soldier is someone who is a part of an army.
it looks like a horse or goat, with one horn on its head.
it is also the largest city of bangladesh.
these show the skills and way of life of the people who have lived there.
it is very cold there in the winter.
he is famous for being a scientologist.
the second powder, puts the person in a zombie-like state where they seem to have no will of their own.
in the middle ages, lots of people believed that the souls of the dead could come back as ghosts and haunt the living.
usually because of a crime that the living person committed.
when the romans ate they were almost lying down, and the food was brought to them by slaves.
to the east lies north korea.
a basin can be any thing or place that water or other things are held in by gravity.
it can also be the top part of grass or the leaf of a plant.
this is also called a caption.
they also like to play with toys.
they do not have more diseases than other common pets.
they can be all one color or have spots or other coloring.
if they have the choice between a food that will need a fight to get, and another food that will not, they take the food that does not need a fight.
people believe this disease was the black death.
few of those diseases can spread to humans though.
branch is the part of a tree from which leaves grow.
they are also often called "silverware", even when they are not made of silver.
they can be made from a number of materials, including glass and ceramics.
it can be a big part of culture in many countries.
they called it happy arabia because the area was so beautiful and powerful.
the first one that he made was snow white and the seven dwarves (1937).
a square root of a number is the number that is multiplied by itself and gives the first number.
the sign for a square root is made by putting a bent line over a number, like this: formula_3.
a whole number with a square root that is also a whole number is called a perfect square.
it is not really known where the square root symbol formula_4 comes from, but some people believe that it was from the letter "r", which is the first letter of the latin and german word "radix".
a number and its opposite are always the same distance from zero.
-3 is just as far to the left of zero as 3 is to the right of zero.
because the air in clouds is colder than the air near the ground, hail can fall in the middle of summer.
a bucket used for work is often made of a strong material such as iron or steel and is used for functions such as carrying coal or soil.
it usually stops working and has to be replaced more often than the rest of the device.
they get very hot when they are on, and take some time to cool off.
some people still use oil and lamps, because they do not have electricity.
the grammys happen every year but no one really seems to care about them
when the rest of the family falls asleep, she speaks and her voice is played by liz georges.
she also is proud to have never met anyone with taller hair outside graceland.
marge is the only member of the family who normally tries to encourage the family to go to church.
she was then hired by mr.
a dining room is a room used for eating and is usually near to a the kitchen to make serving food easier.
they are usually worn when they are crowned or at important occasions.
a crown can also be a part of the head.
he joined the army in world war i and was trained as a pilot.
they exist as one although they are two.
this is a problem in fish farming and also in natural fish groups.
this makes it hard for the fish to get food and get away from danger.
it would be like finding out that caterpillars are really young butterflies even though they look very different..
the kind of "m. cerebralis" that can attack fish is called a "triactinomyxon", and there is a picture of it on the right.
they are about 10 micrometers across and are made of six cells.
followers of this religion call themselves bahá'ís.
bahá'u'lláh said that he was not the only person to carry a message from god and that he was not the last to carry a message from god.
they believe that the messages from the manifestations of god get more and more difficult to understand.
they say the ones that came earlier on had a more simple message than the ones that came later.
he said that god wants people to know as much about him as they can.
because bahá'ís believe that the god they pray to is the same god that abraham spoke to, they believe that they are also an abrahamic religion.
they think there will be more in the future, but there will be no more until 1000 years after baha'u'llah's death.
he said that it was his job to make sure that people were ready for the most important message from god who would be sent soon.
before bahá'u'lláh said he had a message from god he was a member of the religion that was made by the báb.
he became very famous among the bábís.
the angel told him that he had to teach a message from god to the people of the world.
the angel said that god would rescue and protect him so that he could teach this message.
there he told some of his closest friends and family that he was the promised one of all of the major religions, and that eventually the whole world would know his message.
while he was in baghdad, and after, he wrote many books and letters to answer questions that his friends and followers asked him.
at one point he was poisoned, so that he couldn't write anymore because his hands shook so badly.
shoghi effendi was born in 1900 and was only a young man when his grandfather died and he became the leader of the bahá'ís.
he also wrote many books and letters to explain the teachings of his grandfather and great-grandfather.
for baha'is the qur'an is special among the books from other religions; they see it as completely written by god
anyone who believes in bahá'u'lláh and wants to follow his lessons and join his community can be a bahá'í.
these meetings start with prayers and usually someone reads aloud some holy writings.
this time is just so that the bahá'ís in that city can get to know each other and become better friends.
these temples are on each continent.
one day the bahá'ís plan to have temples in every city, but for now there are only a few special temples.
inside the temple people pray or sing to god or praise god.
the bahá'ís try to keep the temples very clean and orderly so that nothing will distract people from the prayers.
everyone is responsible for their own prayers.
bahá'ís are also responsible for reading their holy books for themselves and for learning about their religion.
these are called spiritual assemblies, but will one day be called houses of justice.
markets will 'reach equilibrium' if all the sellers who want to sell at or below a given price have sold to all the buyers who are willing to buy at or above a given price.
the price is worked out in the market.
it gets its name from the greek word "nelios".
many cities in egypt are built next to the river.
the nile provides most of the water used to grow crops in egypt, since much of the rest of the country is in a desert.
not only do animals depend on the nile for survival, but also people who live there need it for everyday use like washing, as a water supply, keeping crops watered and other jobs.
several kinds of material can be used to make a statue, e.g.
usually there is some writing on a statue to say who the person is.
this writing is called an epigraph.
this base is called a "plinth".
now, they are sometimes used for hunting, but a lot of people like to have them as pets because they are very friendly.
people also like them because their face looks like they are smiling all the time.
they also like people, so when they are left alone for too long, they get very sad.
golden retrievers are very good family dogs because they are nice to little children and do not bark very much.
they are great family dogs and provide good companionship.
they are very smart and can be easily trained.
their fur even stops water because it has two special layers, one short and one long.
they are very good at smelling things, so they are also good for hunting.
there are two different kinds of golden retrievers: show dogs and field dogs.
show dogs have very long hair and a lighter colour, but field dogs have a lot more differences.
also, a lot of goldens have skin allergies, so people have to be very careful to not wash the dog too much and make sure that it does not get fleas.
he took a yellow dog and another dog called a tweed water spaniel, which is a dog that does not exist anymore.
the breed was created to be stronger than other retrievers but more gentle with people so they could be trained very easily.
when i think of something, that which i think about is called an "idea".
no one really knows how this works.
one idea can change the whole world.
if someone has a better idea, they can sell it to others.
he stays busy making lots of different types of music for games.
over the next 10 years he was put in prison seven times.
he was sent to prison for 6 years because of this.
in 1964, he as sent to prison for the rest of his life.
each city is the center of government for a state in the united states, usually in the capitol building.
it is the largest city in that state.
people who live in phoenix are known as phoenicians.
it was the sixth largest city in the united states in the 2000 census.
phoenix is a very large city.
this let them grow things on the land.
he saw that the land was good for farming.
the only problems he saw were a lack of rain and good irrigation.
others people had other ideas for names.
the name is the same as the mythological fire bird which is born again from its own ash after it dies.
it was a good name for a city born from a former civilization.
little rock is the capital city and largest city of the u.s.
it is close to the center of the state.
the capitol is a big building with a dome that can be seen from many miles away.
when people talk about both cities, they call them the twin cities.
from the time of its debut, it has been called one of the greatest movies ever made.
it has been considered one of the best movies about the mafia.
all living things must have nitrogen.
the open trap is like an open book.
no other numbers will divide it exactly.
they were used in winter as temporary shelters by hunters when they were away from their regular homes.
they were most often built in places where a lot of snow covers the land for weeks or months at a time, such as the far north of canada and greenland.
as they learned to build them better, sometimes people would build larger igloos that would last longer and hold more people, even for dancing.
it has a lot of green, and is good for rambling but there is the danger of a field being an army firing range.
the word is not used to mean this in japan.
they changed their name to "radiohead".
they felt they had no control over things.
many said it was one of the best rock records in memory.
they were forced to leave spain after the country was taken over by christians, and they brought this old spanish with them to the countries they ran away to.
it is a chain of fast moving waves caused by fast changes in the ocean.
it will begin as normal waves and change to a very big wave very quickly.
the water will draw back from the coast half of the period of the wave before it gets to the coast.
people who do not know of the danger will often remain at the shore.
tsunamis can not be prevented, but there are ways to help stop people from dying from a tsunami.
because an earthquake that caused the tsunami can be felt before the wave gets to the shore, people can be warned to go somewhere safe.
it was caused by an earthquake.
the giant wave moved very quickly.
it is in the state of massachusetts.
repeat this for all numbers until you reach the square root of "n".
it asks for the right view and the right intention, as well as other things.
it also asks for the right speech.
gone with the wind
it is written using the roman alphabet.
some animals are also called worms, but do not belong to this group.
most of their songs are in german, but some in english and in a few other languages.
it was first made in russia.
it has a wooden body and strings like a guitar or a mandolin.
it looks different because it has a body shaped like a triangle.
he thought that the land looked like the south coast of wales.
it is usually used to make cloth and other textiles, and ropes.
hemp is one of the oldest plants humans have grown and used.
these all make the space inside our chest much larger and since it has a larger area than what it had before, pressure decreases because there is less air inside and air has to be pushed in to make the pressure inside our chests the same as outside.
these all make the space inside our chest much smaller, and too much air is held inside.
so most air is pushed out.
court established by the united states constitution, and its decisions are supposed to be followed by all other courts in the united states.
the number of judges has changed over time.
autumn is a time when most animals are looking for food so they can store up for winter, because they soon will be going into hibernation.
arguing over how many people died in the holocaust stops us from thinking about the fact that people were mass murdered.
his idea of the purpose of the ruler was to establish order in society, and believed that the ruler's power should be limited.
he believed that the ruler should be able to stay in power as long as they had the consent of the people that they governed.
he also believed that the reason men entered into society was to claim their possessions.
john locke did not like the idea of government, he thought that all men gave up their freedoms given to them by nature, but he saw it as a necessary institution.
the moon is a natural satellite.
many people in olympia work for the government of the state of washington.
if you do not want to make the pudding, you do not have to.
many people did not like this idea, and many people did not like freud because he said people had hidden thoughts that they didn't know about.
freud thought sex was the most important need for human beings after staying alive.
he called this need the libido.
he thought that sometimes people would do something they did not really want to do because the libido made them do it.
it is usually small in size, and can be any kind of food that you do not eat in large amount.
he was the first person to write news articles about the beatles.
a secretary of state is the top government official in the u.s.
then he spent the next 15 years working in private (non-government) companies.
he also served as a board member for several corporations.
a board member is someone who makes big or strategic decisions on how a company should operate.
they have two adult children and two grandchildren.
the title of the book is "my year in iraq: the struggle to build a future of hope".
it is not when you hit your head with something and made it hurt that way, but when your head hurts from inside.
this is especially the case since at or above 42°c the organs start taking damage that may not be repairable.
when they stop taking the sedatives, they may experience the following
this is wrong because it is the fit or seizure that is "epileptic".
many countries in the world say there are special rules for people who have epilepsy.
there are many different kinds of trout.
they belong to the same family as the salmon.
it is in the north of the country and across the border from, california in the united states.
some are made only for text.
in the time of cold war the usa and the soviet union were enemies and thought the other side was going to attack them.
to dissuade the other side from attacking, both sides built lots of nuclear missiles to make sure that in case they were attacked they would be able to do more damage than the other side.
the first known people who lived in this area are the celts.
the area was named after the miskóc family who were its owners, and it was first mentioned in 1210.
the family lost a war against king charles i and the king took away their properties.
lots of people moved to miskolc because they could find new jobs in the city.
the most important street is the széchenyi street which is often called main street.
the uterus or womb is the part of the female body in which babies grow, and spend nine months developing during pregnancy.
sometimes the word satanism is just used to say that the person using it does not like a group, but the group themselves do not think of themselves as satanists.
this is not true of most satanists.
for them satan is only a symbol for the freedom to be themselves.
the island was well known in to the last century for the iron resources.
in 1577, the rest of the island was returned to the appiani.
he was allowed to keep a personal guard of six hundred men.
most of north africa is desert, which means it is very dry and does not rain very much.
this language is the oldest language in the world and is written in the script "devanagiri",or the language of the gods.
it is caused by damage or disease in the brain.
this means the damage of those can be undone.
this means that they cannot be undone.
a harmonica is small musical instrument that is played with the mouth by blowing into holes in its side.
the image is then created using a computer.
a person suffering from this disease is called an "insomniac".
insomnia can mean a problem with getting to sleep or a problem with staying asleep.
the crash killed almost 200 people.
a priest or priestess is a person who is allowed to do religious rites.
a priest is a member of a church that has been told to look after his (spiritual) community.
he is the head of a parish.
anglican priests can get married before or during the time they are a priest.
the water of red sea has more salt and is clearer than water of most other seas because almost no rivers run into it.
the weather is dry and warm around the red sea and for this reason many people from europe and other parts of the world come for their holiday to the red sea.
the following is a list of country calling codes'".
the celebrations are held in tórshavn.
mestizos exist since the time when spain controlled what is now latin america.
royal air force
the royal air force (raf is a short version) is the air force of the united kingdom.
before it was called the royal air force it was called the royal flying corps (spoken as 'core').
it is made from a plant called agave.
the book of one thousand and one nights
unlike a revolution, which usually takes large numbers of people to take over, a coup can be done by a small number of people.
before or after the main part of worship, a class is held to learn more about that church's teachings, and about the bible or holy scripture of the religion.
sometimes the class is only for children, sometimes adults go there as well and sometimes there are different classes for adults and for children.
it started when jesus christ told his followers to eat bread and drink wine in memory of him, at the last supper.
they truly become the body and blood of jesus christ.
this follows what was said by christ "eat my body and drink my blood".
when some of the jewish people listening to this message in the bible are weirded out and leave, jesus does not try and stop them.
they believe that this is a symbol of the body and blood of jesus, and they call it the sacrament.
they also believe that it helps them to make the promises of baptism all over again.
a rope is made out of several threads.
a patent is a right given by a government to a person or company that has made an invention.
when someone has invented for instance a new engine, he can ask the government for a patent.
if the invention was not known before and the idea is not too simple, the government will give him a patent.
they are concerned with how things work, how they are made or what they are made of.
then people are warned that they should not copy the invention.
when she and her dog finally return, she finds out it was all a dream, and tells her family and friends about her adventures.
debt is what someone owes to someone else.
the good part was this ended world war ii.
she was born in new england.
she met her husband at a music concert.
they fell in love in college.
both she and her husband are strong roman catholics.
they though people were having nightmares because an incubus was sitting on the chest of the sleeper.
this can also be seen on the image.
it belongs to spain, and is all surrounded by morocco, which believes it should belong to them.
the city area is about 28 square kilometers, and there are over 71,000 people living in the city.
they were a strong team in the 1940s.
the red wings continued to be a strong team throughout the 1960.
they were not a strong team again until the late 1980s.
the team was one of the richest in the nhl, which helped them get many good players.
sid howe was also a star on the team at this time.
sometimes they inbreed dogs who have the same close ancestors, and sometimes they mix dogs from very different ancestors or even from different breeds.
in 1990, people found out that the group never sang anything at all.
some are very hard and some are soft.
sometimes the runs in streams, and sometimes its spreads out across the land.
slowly they set hard into rock.
metamorphic rock is often harder than the rock that it was before it changed.
all three kinds of rock can be changed by being bent by forces in the earth.
geologists use some simple ideas which help them to understand the rocks and soil that they are studying.
it is the northwest part of the country.
it is most famous for making salt and cheese.
midnight oil is a rock band.
faith no more
the movie and the book owe their names to the list of over a thousand jews who worked in the title character's factory.
his list was the list of jews he wanted to save.
north and south
it is the first of three books about two friends who must fight against each other during the american civil war.
an apparatus is an object which can be used for a certain function.
the team was much stronger in the 1960's.
it is a group of islands and its official language is portuguese.
djibouiti decided to be a country of its own with good friendship with its neighbouring country of ethiopia.
the country is close to a narrow part of the red sea so it is considered an important area from a military viewpoint.
the land is flat in most places.
it is the third one up from the mouth.
many boats and ships go back and forth on lake huron, carrying useful things such as iron ore.
the water that flows out of lake huron goes through a river that flows past detroit, michigan.
the water then flows into lake erie on its way to the ocean.
it is the second lake up from the mouth.
it is the seventh largest country in africa by amount of land.
the niger river and sénégal river are in the south of mali.
most of the people live in the southern part of the country.
this was a big area that includes mali.
it does not have many mountains.
there are flat areas in the north, which are covered by sand, and there is savanna around the niger river in the south.
women also do pottery and the pots are bought and taken to markets.
this way of talking about area is often used to say how much land there is on a farm, or in a city or country, for example.
a region is the name for one of 25 areas into which the land is divided in peru.
he lived with his mother and grandfather when he was a child.
as a child in washington, bundy was a good student and went to church often, yet he found it hard to make friends and he began stealing.
he left her a few days later and then went on the begin his murders.
she was found the next morning in a pool of blood.
he began killing again in october.
he then tried to handcuff her but she would not let him and she jumped out of the car and escaped.
bundy was angry that she had got away and so a few hours later he kidnapped another girl and killed her.
the police then noticed that his car was the car the girl who escaped had told them about.
after that he murdered a 12 year old girl called kimberley leach.
in the time he was in prison and waiting to be executed he helped the police investigate other murders and in 1988 he admitted to having killed 8 more women than he was tried for.
now he is ready to carve.
a single mark could be called a graffito but the word graffiti is usually used, meaning that there is more than one mark.
it was used for good instead of vandalism.
it is often but not always illegal.
some products must come from a certain area and be made in a certain way in order to have the name of the product.
if the case goes to court, the lawyer will then represent those people, either defending the person because someone else has started a legal case or arguing a case that the person has started.
when a person is accused of a crime the person has a defence lawyer to try and show they have not committed a crime.
the lawyer arguing that they did do the crime is called the "prosecutor".
it got its name from the department, which is famous for making it.
the deaths of the asian workers and the prisoners were real events, but most of the book and the movie are not true.
inn is sometimes used to mean a smaller hotel.
some like it hot
it was spoken long before the romans brought latin to the iberian peninsula.
some of them were also false leads, and turned out to be something else.
at the time, most (but not all) of the letters from f through i were already designated, so the use of the letter k was considered quite reasonable.
it applies to a married couple, and in the past meant that the man of the couple left his wife for another woman, usually to have sexual intercourse with that woman that is not his wife.
in most countries adultery is no longer a crime, but most people still see it as a bad thing.
if a person who is married takes part in adultery, that person's husband or wife would usually have the right to be able to go to court to divorce that person.
perjury is the word used for a person who says something that he or she knows is wrong, and that the person does so while they are under oath (in a courtroom).
you might also say that the person has lied when they promised not to do so.
seven deadly sins
people see that some of those sins are connected.
they have tried to put an order to them.
each of those sins is a way to not loving god and to not loving the others as much as oneself.
those guilty of lust, are in the second circle of the purgatory.
there they are blown around by a strong wind, without the hope of ever resting.
this is because lust is so powerful, that it can blow one around without need or aim.
if we do not get enough of it, we get a disease known as goitre.
when you buy salt from a store, iodine is sometimes added to make sure that we get enough.
the house of representatives is in one of the two wings in the u.s.
the term of the speaker of the house is two years in office.
it is made up by the author.
they are burned to heat water into steam, which can push a fan-like object called a turbine.
people also burn coal to heat their homes, but they do not do it as much as they used to because it produces too much pollution.
one of the best known examples is calcium, which humans and many other animals need to build strong bones and teeth, among other things.
it was created in 1974, but was never popular with the people who lived in the area.
this means that each letter has its own pronunciation, and it is easy to read any text once they learn how the letters are pronounced.
the weather in rochester is warm in the summer and cold in the winter, with a lot of snow falling in the winter and early spring.
the harp is a musical instrument.
it dates back to 4000 bc when the egyptians used them in holy places.
the strings are tied to the frame.
empty boxes can make sounds louder.
the oldest harps from egypt did not have pillars.
this makes the strings move so that the strings make sounds.
harp players play songs by plucking the strings in the right order and at the right time.
there are many different kinds of harps.
they are usually tuned so that playing each string in order sounds like playing all the white notes on a piano in order.
they can be too big to be lifted by one person.
this is the kind of harp that is used in a symphony orchestra.
the lowest and highest notes on a pedal harp are the same as the lowest and highest notes on a piano.
they are very heavy, and need more than one person to move them.
some instruments have the word harp in their name, but they are not really harps.
the harp is such an old musical instrument, that people sometimes say "harp" when they mean any kind of instrument.
voting is when people make a decision by saying what they want.
it measures the work being done.
today the city is part of lower saxony.
when he was in elementary school, his teacher once tried to keep the children busy, telling them to add up all the numbers from 1 to 100.
it is considered by many people to be one of the seven natural wonders of the world.
many people come from around the world to visit the grand canyon.
the peruvian government is now trying to bring him back to peru in order to have him face trial
there are 11 songs in this album.
six of them are new songs.
if they are not aware of what they are doing this is unconscious behaviour.
humans will pull their hand back without thinking if they accidentally touch something hot.
this is done because organisms want to avoid pain and will pull away from the thing that is causing the pain.
for organisms, learning means that they change their behaviour because they remember having been in that situation before and know how to react.
children are taught what is good behaviour and what is bad behaviour.
some people complain when it gets hot.
the fight of one step teaches how to direct attention, but the fight of three steps teaches him how to move forward and to move backward, as well as how to use a distance.
the form is considered as if the performer of the form were defending himself against many enemies.
the fight of training gives the chance to use freely all the techniques against one or some opponents.
the free fight allows make continuous use of the techniques against the other person in a controlled environment.
attention is given to safety at all times.
the students stop their blows close to the target.
therefore, if in a real fight they decide to hit the target, they can do it easily.
both states of mind can spread over his life outside of class.
and when they hit while wearing such things, they does not feel whether their technique is correct.
it will not happen immediately; usually two or three months are necessary in order to develop the endurance.
the important part of it is proper breathing.
the student has to breathe at the right time when he hits or he blocks.
if he stops his breath when he does an action, he can still do the action, but he will become gradually tired as time passes.
finally he will lose his ability to continue.
at first it was called "anhedonia", but this title would not sell the movie.
his father was the owner of a place that had bumper cars.
he was the first person to win the award in that category.
gasoline can be used in a wide variety of things that we use in day to day lives.
a person should not drink gasoline.
all tropical cyclones form over the warm ocean waters in the warm part of earth near the equator.
it starts out as a group of storms when the water gets as hot as 80 degrees or hotter.
most form between may and november.
when a name is retired, it is removed from the list and replaced by a new name of the same gender.
they are used in order without regard to the year.
all are used without regard to year.
a new list is used each year.
fat is important for the human body because it gives much energy and helps the body use the vitamins in the food.
olive oil is an especially healthy fat.
the energy that fat gives the body must be used up by moving or working.
it was built by the u.s.
the government hangs colored lights from the big cable, and turns them on at night so that the bridge can be seen from many miles away.
this was a very important story at the time.
if two people want to have sex, law says that they must have a certain "age".
this is called the age of consent.
at that age, law says that the people are mature enough to decide for themselves if they want to have sex with each other.
if a person is caught having sex with someone who is below the age of consent, he or she may be punished as a sex offender.
they may have to serve a prison sentence.
she is the governor of the state of michigan.
she ran for governor of michigan in 2002, even though she had lived in the state for less than 15 years.
she is the first woman to be part of that court.
he was made a judge on that court in 1988.
thomas has been a justice since 1991.
his father left his family when he was only a year old, leaving his mother leola anderson, to take care of the family.
she has been an associate justice since 1993.
he asked his friend to make sure that all his writings which were not published, including his three novels, would be destroyed when he died.
a typical situation in his books might be someone who has gone somewhere to take a message, but he does not know what the message is or who it is for.
the people he meets confuse him even more.
he never married or became free from his parents.
he felt that he had no will of his own.
he found it difficult to make friends, he hated his job and everyone around him.
he often felt that he belonged nowhere.
he was different because he was jewish, but he did not become part of the jewish community either.
he supported czechs who wanted to rule their own country and let their culture flourish, but he was not one of them because he himself was brought up in a german culture.
he was good at his job although he hated it.
he spent some time in a sanitorium.
his family becomes ashamed of him and they stop looking after him so that he slowly dies.
stories like these are a kind of fable.
he is never told what he has done wrong.
even the priest tells him that if he asks what he has done wrong it proves that he is guilty.
at the time of his death only a few people understood kafka’s writings.
the phrase is also used to mean that computers need to be thrown away in a special way, as they often have things that are bad for the environment or dangerous inside them that can cause problems if they are thrown away like usual waste (garbage).
ayyavazhi is not a part of hinduism, but since it was not considered a separate religion it was considered as a branch of hinduism only officially.
there was no definite history about the beginning of arul nool; but the followers believe that it was written by citars and by those who get possessed by divine power.
the author says that god woke him up during his sleep and ordered him to take the first words from what he said.
he woke up in the morning as usual and he didn't know what he had written the day before.
the only party which still exists today from that time is the spd.
the smaller parties had to accept the leading role of the sed.
war and peace
it is about four families of noblemen in russia during the wars with napoleon, and how they deal with the war and with one another.
the american city of bay city is a small city in the state of michigan, united states.
in the 2000 census it had more than 35,000 people living in it.
and it is in the family of four (4).
waste may also be something that you cannot touch as wasted time or wasted opportunities.
the north of the country has very large areas of rainforest, but in the south are many farms which grow bananas, peanuts and other crops.
they are often kept by groups of people on public ponds for their beauty and calming nature.
north by northwest
the country was first made as a place where freed slaves could live.
in this country there are 14 districts.
a door is a hard, flat thing a person can open and close so the person can go into a room or other place.
it is found in houses and other buildings.
a revolving door is a group of doors that turn in a circle as a person pushes one.
the person can go through, but wind and rain cannot get in.
a blind door is a fake door that is really part of the wall.
people use them to make a room look nice.
a fire door is a door that does not let fire go through.
they are usually made of heavy steel.
raichu has so much electrical power in its body that it has to use its tail as an earth to avoid shocking itself!"
there are 6,000 examples to be found around the world with over 1,200 of them in the air at any given time.
the 737 is seated 3 on one side and 3 on the other side.
he wanted to solve the problems caused by the depression.
the measures he liked to take to deal with inflation were not well liked.
these languages are called language isolates.
all animals or plants that are the same kind belong to the same species.
the next group is the class; all birds are in the same class.
the cold war ended in 1991.
they had brought their own kinds of wine plants.
it almost ended the making of wine in california.
the first among these producing regions is called monterey-county.
they are part of a winery, the place were wine is produced.
the bold and the beautiful
he also wrote a lot of books about what he found.
ever since he was young, he had dreamed of being captain on a ship and sailing around the world.
he knew that he must have another destiny other than farming for the rest of his life.
he studied as much as he could.
that is how he learned a lot of good knowledge about navigation and science.
at the beginning, it was an honor to be on these expeditions.
after a while, money was the most important reason for doing his job.
at the point of time of the pass there have to be at least two players between the goal line and the offensive player.
it is the day of the year when lovers show their love to each other.
love notes can be given to one another.
after the second world war, us soldiers brought this festival to europe.
they may not have been allowed to get married because the parents did not agree with the connection or because the bridegroom was a soldier or a slave, so the marriage was forbidden.
this did not please the emperor.
these were picked by young men.
the people who live there speak spanish.
every island has been created by volcanoes in the bottom of the sea.
those volcanoes slowly raised until they raised over the water and made the islands.
these people were called the guanches.
the most recent of countries interested in them was morocco.
lufthansa has miles and more to encourage people to fly with lufthansa.
if we do not get enough chromium, certain parts of our body may not work properly.
we get most of the chromium we need from our food we eat.
boxes for food are often made of tin.
the glass can have different colors by adding colored compounds.
silicon also makes up a lot of different rocks and minerals, and they are known as silicates.
they are usually white or yellow.
water plants remove the cadmium from the water so that we do not get harmed by it.
it is not used for many things, and there is not much of it in the air.
it is clear and does not taste like anything, so we do not really see it.
when the light hits it properly it can have many different colors like a rainbow.
we do not need it in our body, and it does not hurt us.
there is actually such a small amount that osmium is very expensive.
it gets stuck in the lungs and has been known to cause cancer.
there are groups that try to make sure there is no dangerous radon in houses.
it is often used on payment websites.
it is written at the bottom of the seal.
usually it is food that is wasted.
either one person eats too much, or the person does something so the food (or the resources) do not reach those who need it.
in christianity, this is considered to be one of the seven deadly sins.
greed is a desire to have more goods, or more wealth that is needed.
fornication is a word that means having sex with someone who is not your spouse.
this is worked out by subtracting how much money they have spent ("expenditure") from how much money they have made (income).
this contains lots of stored energy which the plant needs to release.
oak trees come in many different kinds of species, but all of them have large seeds called acorns.
many of the people who own wooded land in these parts of the world are very proud of their oak trees.
this is what keeps a plant in shape.
players can fight alone or team up with someone else against a friend.
a catalyst also can also be used in a reaction again and again.
some of them are found in snake venom and are dangerous for our nervous system or heart.
the leaders of the party promise to work -- if need be to sacrifice their very lives -- to put this programme into action.
the south of it belongs to tanzania.
the north of it is in kenya.
this area is most famous for the migration that takes place every year.
some spiders are smaller than a coin and some are so big they eat small birds.
sometimes they hide in holes in the ground, then run out and grab an insect that walks by.
or they will even go out and attack them with no webs at all.
some can also jump quite well.
studies have shown that they do this on purpose and for long time periods.
grass is a type of plant that covers the ground like a green rug.
the plants in the grass family are called grasses.
people have grown them as food for farm animals for about 10,000 years.
grasses have also been used to make paper for more than 4000 years.
a tree begins to bear fruit when it is 4 or 5 years old.
in some areas, such as yucatán, they were still used in place of small coins as late as the 1840s.
emperor penguins are black and white like all penguins, and the sides of their neck are golden.
they have short wings that help them to dive up to 900 feet to catch larger fish.
they can swim up to 12 miles per hour for a short time, which lets them escape their main enemy, the leopard seal.
they can stay warm because they have a thick layer of blubber.
they also have large amounts of body oil that help in keeping them dry in the water.
it was part of the war called the third crusade.
people who died during the putsch.
it came from the millerite group which included people from many denominations.
that is why the church that came from them called themselves "adventists."
the sda church also believe that the day we should worship god is saturday.
it is the seventh day of the week.
it is different in the way that it allows values to be more accurate than on or off.
if it is thrown 1000 times, it is expected that it will land with heads side up 500 times.
fuzzy logic says because of wind or other things you might not be in the correct place so just keep getting closer until you catch the ball.
if what is called "free" is something that is not alive, that means that it is being given away by someone who does not want any money in return.
often things that are "free" in this way are given away as add-ons to something that is paid for.
for example, an eating place may give away a free glass of water with a paid meal.
if what is called "free" is a person, that means that it is able to be what it wants to be, or to do what it wants to do, without being ordered around.
most people want to be free.
but many strong people would like to order around people who are weaker than they are.
some countries have laws that try to keep the strong people from pushing around other people too much.
maybe a neighbor has a cat who has just given birth to a group of kittens, and so she will try to give away her "free kittens."
that is the first kind of freedom listed above.
that is the second kind of freedom.
it is part of the u.s.
many people go to see mackinac island in the summer because the island passed a local law that says that no one can use a car on the island.
there is a narrow paved road that follows the 8 miles of shoreline.
the list promised one hundred people on it, but in the end there were only fifty.
this includes if it is allowed to be copied, sold to other people, or if there is a limited time when it can be used.
this means that people who use the licensed software can do anything with it, except say it is all their work or say that the people who made it first support the new software in any way.
it also stops people from suing the first makers if something goes wrong with it.
there are fish in the lake that only exist here and nowhere else in the world.
one such fish is called omul.
it is a kind of trout.
it belongs to the same family as the trout and the salmon.
salmon is a kind of fish.
there are many different kinds of salmon.
salmon belong to the same family of fish as the trout.
many people like to eat salmon, so the fish is also grown in fish farms.
it is similar to the wild turkey that is found more to the north in north america.
east of it is lower saxony, that is a part of germany.
the oldest paper with the name drenthe on it is from 820.
she was a jewish girl and she wrote a diary.
the great white becomes adult about nine years after its birth.
deaths are caused by loss of blood from the first wound.
most attacks also occur in waters where it is hard to see or where the shark is confused.
a person can have dyslexia even if he or she is very smart or educated.
he found that some parts of the brain were not connected very well, and that this happened during the fourth month of pregnancy.
this problem has a big effect on the left half of the brain.
this problem can not be found with a normal hearing test, so a special doctor has to do special tests to find it.
in order to tell if a child has dyslexia, he or she has to be seen by a doctor.
a child can be called dyslexic if he or she cannot read or write well and there is no other reason for the problem.
doctors are trying to create early tests to help find out whether a child has dyslexia before they are old enough to go to school.
one way teachers help dyslexic students is to break words into different sounds.
the student must learn how to write the different sounds and create words.
this helps with reading and writing.
some people believe that dyslexic children can read and write better if they put pieces of colored paper on top of what they are reading.
she was accused of torturing and killing many girls and young women.
it is unknown how many women she killed.
he was known as a very brave, but also very cruel person.
since battles with the turks kept her husband away from the castle, elizabeth became the lady of the castle.
the city is the eight largest in spain.
doing that makes possible to find things shared by all the languages of the world.
it can melt when you hold it in your hand, but it would not be smart to hold pure caesium in your hand because it is extremely reactive.
the human body does not need caesium, and it may be dangerous because it acts like other important things our bodies need, like sodium and potassium.
there is not much rubidium on the earth, so it can cost a lot of money to get it.
there are not many uses for rubidium.
we can see where the barium travels in the body and this can tell us whether there are problems, such as blockages.
there is a really small amount of barium in our food, and this does not cause problems.
what this means is that there is not very much scandium found in the earth.
scandium is not very dangerous because there is not much of it on earth, so there is not enough of it to harm us.
it does not have many uses.
there is a little bit of vanadium in vitamins just to make sure that we do not get sick (in case our body does need vanadium).
this really only happens when a person gets poisoned because there is not enough of it in our food to actually hurt us.
sometimes there is too much arsenic in water, and the government tries to make sure that it is removed before people drink the water.
we get all of the arsenic that we might need from our food.
but the ussr and the us still did not trust each other.
it is often found as the main part of natural gas.
the arrows are in time with the music.
there is a bar at the top of the screen.
light is easy and heavy is hard.
the next show after the third season is called power rangers zeo.
there are many different versions of power rangers, and most of them were made with better technology, yet many still prefer this one more than any other.
rita and lord zedd have an army of fighters known as putties, which get destroyed and broken into many pieces when they are hit by their weak spot - a z plate on their chest.
when she gets out of it, she wants to destroy earth, because that's what she wanted to do before she was put in prison.
one of them is called goldar.
he is a blue gorilla in gold armor who can fight better than anyone.
the teenagers are given special magic coins that turn them into power rangers.
they free him from rita's evil magic, but his magic coin stops working the right way, and begins to hurt him when he uses it.
lord zedd also puts rita back in her prison and throws her away into space, because she was not doing a good enough job of being evil.
no one knows who he is, but he turns out to be the old green ranger.
he agrees to help them and makes new coins and new zords for them.
he is very powerful, even more powerful than his son and daughter together.
he leaves the team to go to switzerland.
she also leaves the team for switzerland.
she leaves the team to become an athlete.
he also leaves to go to switzerland.
he later becomes the white ranger.
users can get games for free this way but most of the time these games do not have all the levels.
they cannot be together because it is not allowed where they live.
at the beginning of the book he is a mean old man who runs a business lending people money.
these people are poor and often cannot pay him back.
he then refuses to give money to two men who are collecting for charity.
later that evening, he is visited by the ghost of his dead business partner jacob marley, who went to hell because of his bad life.
he tells scrooge that the same future will happen to him unless he changes and that during the night he will be visited by three more ghosts.
these will show him where he went wrong in his life, and how to be a better person in the future.
this ghost shows him where he went wrong in the past, showing him his unhappy childhood and how he did not get married.
this ghost shows scrooge what christmas will be like in the future if he does not change.
a lot of food and cover must also be there.
at five years of age females may be twice the weight of males.
they can be caught with almost every bait.
they all mean the same thing.
this was around the year 1800.
their tail measures about 8 inches.
it is one of the smallest and most powerful predators in the world.
if he was as big as a bear, he would be even the strongest animal in the world.
these live now up to 13 years and have to fear nothing except mankind.
it had a length of around and the width was.
the ship had eight cannons which were named as the heavy artillery.
the light ones were twelve cannons.
this because it was a huge battleship few other ships would be able to get close enough to attack without being destroyed, so it could control a large area of sea.
it was kind of a myth.
only with the red army they had a chance.
a teacher is a person who helps people learn.
a teacher often works in a classroom.
there are many different kind of teachers.
there are different ways of teaching.
today, it is an empty ghost town on the deserts of new mexico.
ajam is an arabic word that came from jam the name of a king or prophet according to old story he was the king of world.
in some cases it was a word that was used as a way of making people seem like they were not as good as them.
they are considered to be cute dogs and are getting ever more popular.
they were only together for two years in the late 1970s and they were known for their rowdy behavior more than their music.
the people who planned this wanted to kill the men of parliament, along with king james i. they wanted to kill the rulers of england as they were upset at the treatment of catholics at this time.
he married twice and had five children.
they choose someone who they think has written something that has great value.
it is one of the few language isolates.
latin was the most important language in the west.
some people said that the holy spirit was a creature.
at first the eastern orthodox did not mind the pope's claim for power over the west - as long as his power stayed in the west.
the state is very important for raising and selling cows and other farm animals.
one in five of all the birds in the world live in the rainforests of the amazon.
the forest which remains is threatened.
people who care for the envirnoment warn about the loss of biodiversity.
some people have calculated that it may even pay to save the forest.
if all the wood is cut down for timber, it has a value of about us $ 1000.
all in the family
it was about a family who lived in new york.
the song has been used since the country became independent in 1979.
love the land that gave us birth,
gone the times when nations battled
may the good lord bless our island,
strong in soul and strong in arm!
this is to prevent damage caused by being hit by the puck.
the bottom edge is also longer and flatter.
some people believe that deities are powerful spirits that control the nature of things.
a female god is called a goddess.
the other half belongs to the goddess freyja.
it has an area of 153 km².
it grants more control over everyday life to the islanders, and lists the protection a person can expect from the government.
these changes usually happen when a colony gets close to being independent.
he really wants to be a human being instead of being a puppet made of wood with strings.
diplomacy is the talking of one country or more than one country with another country.
if something is acellular, it contains no cells or is not made up of cells.they are usually too small to see with the naked eye and must be seen with a microscope.
before he was on television, he sang in the rock band pray for the soul of betty.
its one of three regions in belgium.
this is because it was built completely by a spanish.
there are librarians that also work with the deaf and in prisons.
he was born in what is now the state of new mexico and was also a respected medicine man.
a gold rush is when a lot of miners go to a mining place full of gold.
the california gold rush was when a lot of people went to the mountains of california to find gold.
sovereignty is the right of a government to have complete control over its area.
a smile can often be used as a sign of confidence or agreement or as a sign of happiness.
emperor of ethiopia
the emperors did not use their real name when they became emperor of ethiopia, but they made up a new one for their rule.
the sound of music
but, in an attempt to escape, the captain and his family leave the house late one evening, and while pushing their car out of the drive, they are caught by the head of the army in the area.
they told them that their car broke down and that the family was supposed to be performing at the [salzburg festival].
then they get to the festival and perform.
their dear uncle max helps them to escape while the army is entertained.
body mass index is a special measure that allows to see if a person is of an appropriate weight for their height.
the figures below are not to be used for small children who are growing.
the above should only be taken as a guide.
it is still called that today.
it is when a person wants to starve his or her self.
people who have it feel that they are fat and want to be skinny.
they do this at least two times a week.
the person always thinks about how his or her body looks, and he or she wants to be skinny.
people who had bad things happen to them or who have lots of money are more likely to get the disease too.
one is also likely to get it if he or she is smart or likes things to be perfect.
this is the main island where all the government offices are held.
it does not have an airport.
the queen of the united kingdom is the ruler of anguilla, but she works through a governor.
the movie is about a man living in philadelphia, who is trying to become a great boxer.
it was followed by 5 sequels, the most recent came out in 2006.
a tailor is a person whose job is to make clothes to fit people.
it can separate the form of something from the things inside it.
in publishing for example, a template is a layout made by someone else to give an idea what to write in different parts of a book or story.
it can be a way to copy words and pictures.
in some places the air goes up faster than the glider is going down.
he is best known as one of the first people for utilitarianism and animal rights.
a lucid dream is a dream where the person knows that they are dreaming.
the person can then try to control things in the dream because it is not real.
my fair lady
a man for all seasons
a man for all seasons is a play about the life of sir thomas more that was first put on in 1960.
we show that if "not" every number greater than 1 can be written as a product of primes, we end up in some kind of impossibility.
in this way we have now proven the first part of the theorem.
now we have to prove that there is only one way to write a positive number greater than 1 as a product of prime numbers.
first we now prove this lemma.
it is also important to cover all your skin because it can give you something like a sunburn.
there are other kinds of welding that do not use an arc.
sometimes it is still called that today, but it's better to call it by its real name instead.
because it is used up, it must constantly be fed into the weld.
the electrode is made of tungsten, so it will not melt even though it is touching an arc.
if it didn't, things on the metal or things in the air could cause problems in the weld.
because there is no liquid, it will not clean up dirt and other things on the metal.
this means that the metal has to be clean before it is welded.
the two pieces melt together at that place.
then they are beat together with hammers until they are one piece.
things that a power supply does are to lower the voltage and control the amount of current.
the power supply usually has controls on it that allow these things to be changed.
that is why it is used most of the time.
this is why it takes a lot of force to do and is very hard.
a person who likes to watch other people is also known as a voyeur.
when this is continually done to a person it can have a bad effect.
someone who does this is called a stalker.
they may feel they do not have the power to stop the stalker.
since finding the numbers to multiply together is very difficult for large numbers, this fact can be used in cryptography.
little is known about this person, but people think he lived there when ptolemy i was the pharaoh.
it is not known where or when he is born or why he died.
it is made up of five islands.
it is often used in stories.
the story of the three little pigs with a wolf and pigs that talk and act like humans is an example of anthropomorphism.
apostrophes are used to show that some letters have been taken out in an abbreviation.
you should not put an apostrophe in the middle of a word ending in s, such as a plural.
they are also used if a member of parliament is removed from office for some reason, for example he is guilty of a crime.
happiness is a feeling of pleasure and satisfaction.
happiness is usually thought of as the opposite of sadness, but it is possible to feel both at once.
many philosophers have said that people in this world go back and forth between times of happiness and sadness, but there is nobody who is always happy or always sad.
six is the first perfect number.
it is straightforward to show the last digit of any even perfect number must be 6 or 8.
the first 39 even perfect numbers are 2"n"−1(2"n" − 1) for
each race has different soldiers and buildings.
there are many different buildings in the game.
no player can have more than two hundred supply, so they can only build a certain number of units.
the terran are a middle between these, having strong but easy to kill units that are very powerful when they are used in formation.
micromanagement means moving units so that they can use their special powers to protect each other, and doing many small things to make the fight go smoothly.
it would also hurt or in some cases it has been known to burn people and kill small mammals such as cats and dogs and mice.
she had not named a person to be ruler after her death, so her cousin's son took over.
she became a doctor in 1849.
it is one of the first games to use 3 dimensional levels.
doom has traps that will hurt you and sometimes make you die and fall to the ground.
this means you can fight with other players instead of the demons and zombies.
it is the study of transmutation.
it was first studied to learn how to change lead into gold.
alchemists in the middle ages often tried to make gold using things that were not gold.
the famous game known to many people as world of warcraft was based off of these games.
increasing the number by one is the same as cutting the size of the paper in half.
it is always the square root of 2 (1.4142..).
an envelope may be small enough to make you need to fold the paper going into it, or it can be as large as the paper so that you do not need to fold it.
they got the prize for their peace efforts in the middle east.
he was buried in a special casket, with the hope of being buried in jerusalem one day when palestine becomes free and independent with jerusalem as its capital.
an antidote is a substance or a thing that can make people feel better who took a certain poison.
all three got the prizes for trying to make peace in the middle east.
this fight is usually done using peaceful means, but sometimes uses violence.
they are more common in the united kingdom and the commonwealth than other places like the united states.
they are often used during wars.
they work by changing the way the nerves work in the human body.
people who are night blind are not able to see in the dark or have great difficulty to see in the dark.
the roman number will be mmxxx.
it does not say how this should be displayed.
the following languages are based on xml.
world money fair
he had the idea to build up a stronger market for the collecting of coins.
today more than 40 nations are members of this organisation.
the person who holds the power is called an autocrat.
it is usually to the most powerful people to govern the state.
the use of punctuation in english can change from place to place and from time to time.
the rules are really up to the writer to decide, as long as the meaning is clear.
a period is used to end a sentence.
it shows when an idea is finished.
a period can show numbers that are smaller than one.
with money, a period is used to show the amount of money less than one dollar.
a period is used to show that a word has been made shorter.
a word that is made shorter with a period is called an abbreviation.
a question mark looks like this: ?
an exclamation mark is used write about a strong emotion, or to write the words a person shouted.
it can be used to make a statement stronger or more forceful.
an apostrophe can be used to show that something belongs to something else.
a word will end with just an apostrophe if there is more than one thing and the word already ends with an "s".
two small words that are put together with an apostrophe to make one word are called contractions.
this is normal in writing about a person speaking.
it is used to show where words have been missed out when writing what a person said.
it can also be used to show that there is more to be said but the person stopped at that point.
it was one of the most deadly.
it has also been seen in north america, but is far less common there.
usually it grows in the shade.
often it grows in places where the soil is rich in limestone.
children have died from eating as little as three berries.
the poison present in the plant is called "atropine".
other plants live for two years.
an evergreen plant is a plant that keeps its leaves over the winter.
most plants lose their leaves in autumn.
when talking about plants this means that the plant loses its leaves, usually in autumn.
the leaves will then grow again in spring.
a hallucination is when a person sees an image or hears a sound that is not really there.
people are less likely to have hallucinations in which they smell or touch something that is not really there.
some people have hallucinations if they do not sleep for a number of days, or if they do not eat for a number of days.
some dangerous, poisonous chemicals which can make people very sick or even kill them also cause hallucinations.
when a beam of light shines onto something, that thing will cast a dark image of itself onto the ground or another surface.
this image is usually called shadow.
a place where the sun does not reach when it is shining can also be called "shade".
to make a shadow, there must be a light source, and an object to shine the light at.
as light travels in straight lines, it cannot reach the shadow area without bending around the object.
this can be of children and adults.
a player can choose what they look like from many different clothes and hair styles.
the family must include at least one adult.
some lots are empty and other lots have houses on them.
there are many different floor coverings, wall coverings and doors to choose from when building a house.
the main goal is to keep the sim's eight needs up and in the green.
if they do not go to work two days in a row, they will be fired.
jobs also require a certain number of friends to receive a promotion.
if they do not keep their grades up, they will be sent to military school and will never return.
they can read books to study.
these all follow a different concept.
these hymns praise a number of gods.
it was made after the other three vedas.
a minister is a member of parliament who has a special role dealing with a certain area of government.
the minister for children looks after children's rights - these are laws which take care of how children are treated by their parents or guardians (a guardian is someone who looks after a child when their parents are not able to), and their care in society.
the job means that this minister has a special role in the lives of all children in the uk.
they set the rules saying what people who have no job must do to try and get one, and how much money people who have no job or are in need, get to live on.
the minister also sets rules about what happens to people who do not do enough to find a job, or who break the law by working while they are getting welfare benefits.
you can find out about them by looking at the wikipedia in your own country.
anger is a negative feeling which often happens when a person thinks that someone or something has done something wrong, bad or which puts them in danger, and they want to stop the risk, or punish the person for what they have done.
anger may be the brain's reaction if it thinks there may be pain - as part of the fight or flight decision (whether to attack or run away).
when someone is angry, anger becomes the feeling that has the biggest effect on what they do, once a person makes the choice to do something without watiing, to stop something which they think is a threat which puts them in danger.
usually a fight will only happen after at least one of the people or animals fighting has shown anger.
most people who become angry explain that it happened as a result of "what has happened to them", though it makes the angry person less aware of themselves (and so less able to monitor or control themselves) and they tend to see the situation from their own viewpoint.
they either go up or up and to one side.
it makes it easier to score.
in 1631 he went to live in amsterdam, because many people there had heard of him and wanted him to paint their portraits.
some of them are very large, and some of them are dark and sad.
he was such a good painter, that many of his pictures make people feel as if they are taking part in what is happening.
it comes from the seeds of the mustard plant.
mustard is prepared by grinding the seeds of the mustard plant, and mixing them with water or vinegar.
it usually is in the form of a sauce or a powder.
it can also be made through the use of certain bacteria.
therefore, the poison used to kill them is also deadly to humans.
they may also think that someone who is not present, loves them.
when normal people who are not doctors talk about someone being paranoid, they usually do not mean this person they refer to is mentally ill.
paganism is a term that covers a great number of spiritual and religious beliefs, and someone who follows one of these beliefs is known as a pagan.
soldiers would later also use it as an insult for each other, to mean a sloppy soldier.
a person has courage if he does something even though he is afraid.
courage can be doing things that other people think should be scary.
a person has courage if he puts himself in danger to save another person.
for example, someone may be said to have courage if they fight a lion, or save a baby from a burning building.
the championship has been won many times by
these changes are meant to make the races more interesting, so more people watch.
he was tried before a military court on the island from may 31, 1999.
the arctic circle is one way to say what part of the earth is in the arctic.
it is served in a tall glass.
they are often kept as pets.
it is very light and fluffy.
he has been married four times.
the city is one of the largest in the united states.
on breaking up the icebergs come out into the open sea and at first, they travel north with ocean currents.
being able to read and write is an important skill in modern societies.
people who can read and write are called "literate"; those who cannot are called "illiterate".
one of the causes of illiteracy is that someone who can manage to live without being able to read and write often does not have any reason to want to learn to read and write.
functional illiteracy means that the people have at some time in their lives learned how to read and write.
influenced by the ideas of the age of enlightenment it brought many important changes to france.
it was destroyed by the third estate, the lowest class in france.
he called for a meeting of the estates-general, which was an assembly made up of people from all three estates.
it had not met since 1614.
at first this led to the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen in 1789.
the revolutionaries even tried to make a new religion and a new calendar.
in some countries, like the netherlands, students can wear anything they like when they go to school.
this usually means that there is a set of dressing for girls, and one for boys.
some children do not like uniforms because they do not have a choice in what they must wear.
equinox can also mean either of the two days when this happens.
on these days, the day and the night are most closely equal in length.
around the day of the equinox, the time of daylight is twelve hours - the same as that of the night.
the exact day and time when this happens depend on how far away from the equator it is being measured.
the time of daylight is quite easy to measure.
this meant that due to bad weather it had to be replaced often.
the condition attached was that the devil should get the soul of the first to pass over the bridge.
they are a family of particles that are different from the other known family of fermions, the quarks.
that area is an exclave, which means it is separated from the main part of the country by part of another country.
the next largest city is baucau.
the army stayed there until 1999, when they gave up control of the territory with the help of the united nations.
his songs were easy to learn and remember, and their lyrics said things felt by many people.
an object with a lot of matter in a certain amount of volume has high density.
an object with a little matter in the same amount of volume has a low density.
longitude is a way to say where a place is on the earth.
most of the island is above the water line, and we see it as a continent.
all scanners have special parts which are used to take a picture from an object.
its main purpose is to support their breasts, but is sometimes also used for sexual attraction in the form of lingerie.
the letter is a measure of how much larger the breasts are than the ribcage.
many women prefer to find a brand and size that works for them by trial and error.
this pain may be physical or psychological.
the person who is tortured, is usually tortured because he or she has some information the other people want.
people who have been tortured are often suffering in the long term.
this is about events of the 1680s.
roman emperor is the name that is given to the rulers of the roman empire.
the word means that no people live in the place.
it is often used to describe islands.
in the beginning, a gate was a place between two parts of a wall, or a fence which could be opened and closed to let people go through it.
when going on an aircraft, people need to get together in a certain area of the airport first.
they then pass through some kind of doorway to get onto the plane.
that is what is called "gate".
a city gate is a gate that is found in many medieval cities.
it was the place where people could enter or leave the city.
a legend says that he said he would name the city after the next animal he caught.
most of the lines are in the city but some travel away from the city.
many people visit the market in the early morning and throw confetti.
during the festival, people put small ships with a light in them into the river aare.
a preview is a small piece of something used to show what the whole is like before it is generally available.
a price is a value people think something is worth.
this is usually measured as money.
she would then go to peter and ask him how much he wants for the two sheep skins she needs.
some of this money she could then give to peter to get the sheepskin.
salary is a type of payment a person gets for work done for a job.
he sang the blues and played the trumpet and was famous in many countries for it.
this is why a magnet must be placed close to an object to attract it.
this will also happen with two north poles.
the state is known for producing iron and other metals.
a character role in a play means one of the people in the play who have a particular character (personality).
these songs came from the area near the mouth of the mississippi river.
imagine this situation: the police catch two criminals after they committed a crime.
the police don't know which person committed the crime and which person just helped.
they question the two in separate cells.
if both stay silent, they only go to jail for 6 months.
if one betrays and the other stays silent, the one that stays silent goes to jail for 10 years and the other one doesn't go to jail at all.
no matter what happens, the prisoners will never see each other again.
if the other prisoner betrays, then betraying lets you go to jail for 2 years instead of 10 years.
in other words, it's always best for you to betray, even though the two of you would be better off if you both stayed silent.
but sometimes the countries are in the same situation as the prisoners: each country only cares about itself, and it's better off if it "betrays" the other country by making weapons.
it is one of the seven wonders of the world.
many people think it is one of the most beautiful buildings ever built.
shah jahan was going to build an identical black tomb for himself, but he died before he even began to build, which is very sad because the two tombs together could have looked so great to see two marble structures.
on the other side of the charles river is the city of boston.
the city is said to be as city of festivals almost all the days in year is having at least a small festival.
to the north is the country of nepal.
it has many villages and towns.
the state has an area of.
it is bigger than italy but smaller than oman.
the people who live here are called bengalis.
so it was decided to divide the country into two parts -- one part for muslims and one part for hindus.
a foreigner is a person who is from a country that is not the country he or she is currently in.
such people are also often said to live "abroad".
looking from the air to a city, the city will often appear as one big "blob" in the landscape.
however, very often the limits of the city are not the limit of the blob, where on one side there is city, on the other there is countryside.
the beginning of a street may be in the city, the end of it may not.
the city very often is in the center of the blob, but may not be.
it is at least one thousand years old and is based on sanskrit.
the written script is devanāgarī - the same as one used to write hindi.
punjabi is spoken by as many as 100 million people, meaning that it is one of the top ten languages in the world by number of speakers.
they are both very different from the english words you are reading.
20 million people are followers of sikhism, that makes it the fifth largest religion in the world.
this is also called the birth of the khalsa.
he is considered to be infinite, or he always existed and always will.
they believe everything is a part of god.
the thing that is keeping people from reaching union is bad karma.
followers try to stay away from these things.
sometimes people who live in the same place make a dialect.
it is named after the copper reserves.
they were one of the tribes referred to as the five civilized tribes.
they lived in houses made from wood.
he lived in georgia before being forced to move to the place now called oklahoma.
then they put the things they boiled into a bowl and eat them.
goldfish need a lot of space so they have room to swim and so the water does not get dirty too fast.
it is also said that goldfish have very short memories, but people have proved that this is not true.
there are many kinds of goldfish.
another common kind is called a black moor, which is black colored.
this exercise is best done alone at first and then with a partner.
thrusting should not be used with a partner until very near the end of treatment.
after a few weeks of both these treatments, the pe will become more like traditional ejaculation and after about one and a half through two and a half months, it should be absolutely normal.
they wear clothes that are black or purple.
among those punished in that way were people who did not live peacefully with their rulers, like joan of arc.
people also though that this mark could not bleed.
in that way it could not be felt, and did of course not bleed.
this has led to a new movement.
some of it is known as wicca.
some of it is known as shamanism.
some of the rites have also been used as a form of protest.
the west bank is a piece of land in the middle east.
these talks are about what will happen in the west bank and the gaza strip in the future.
he started a religious movement based on the ideas of john wyclif.
his followers became known as hussites.
by using ((web-cams)), or to talk directly for free over the internet.
it has been in business since 1985.
two regions that have a common border must not get the same color.
the proof can not be done by hand.
it is quite obvious, that there are maps that cannot be colored in this way with only three colors.
if the regions are countries, the border can only be crossed at certain points.
it is the time when all the dinousaurs died and the mammals began to rule the world.
people use it to learn from it about a certain subject.
they might also teach other people about that subject.
it does not need to be proven.
two numbers that are both the same as a third number are the same number
if a and b are two numbers that are the same, and c and d are also the same, a+c is the same as b+d
if a and b are two numbers that are the same, and c and d are also the same, a-c is the same as b-d
various things can be put into a bag.
the empty set is like an empty bag: it has no things in it.
this is done by looking at two different bags.
one such set is the set of natural numbers.
there are more real numbers than there are natural numbers, for example.
a set can have a large number of elements.
some of these elements perhaps have some other things in common, other than that they are all in the bag.
it can be thought of as a smaller bag, inside the bigger bag.
it is like taking several shopping bags, and putting all things from them into a bigger bag.
the intersections of two sets is a set that contains all the elements that are in both sets.
it's like saying i want all things that are in the first bag, but not in the second bag.
some sets are very important to mathematics.
there is a small town somewhere.
all the men in the town do not like beards, so they either shave themselves, or they go to the barber shop to be shaved by the barber.
people live in about two hundred of them.
it is used to make glass and cement.
the roots of a plant is the part that is buried in the soil.
some roots go very deep into the ground.
he was a very active critic during the years of crisis in italy after the first world war and during the early years of fascist rule.
years: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
it soon proved to be successful, and sky decided to continue it.
the country of jordan has made the group illegal.
suicide attacks are often done in a crowded place so that as many people as possible are killed.
they are common in the middle east.
a laser light is made up of a single wave length with all the waves lined up.
the city used to be known by the name of trivandrum'".
the name is still in common use and most non-keralites prefer to use trivandrum.
the city is also important for people from around the world seeking help through ayurveda medicine and therapy.
the story is about a group of animals who throw out the humans from the farm they live on and run it themselves.
there are many characters in the book who are based on real people.
there are many different kinds of kelp.
kelp can reach a length of up to 60 m. it is usually eaten as a vegetable.
it was used as food long before the existence of written records.
there is lots of eating and drinking.
it is on for sixteen days ending on the first sunday in october.
if this is the first or the second the festival is extended to the end on 3 october, the day of german unity.
this is the day when east germany and west germany joined into one country again in 1990
at the end of it there was a big horse-race.
the next years they organized this horse-race and the feast again, because the people had liked it so much.
other cities all over the world have even copied the oktoberfest, and now they also hold feasts that are similar to the oktoberfest.
there are 14 main tents at the oktoberfest.
now they are being made by crystal dynamics.
there were many different weapons for lara.
it takes very long to complete.
that is because it has a lot of little mistakes in it.
that is because the story is very beautiful.
the story is also changed a little bit.
to solve this problem many people use a laxative.
on one side of the river the city is called ulm.
on the other side it is called neu-ulm.
the country was peaceful in the 1990s.
the guardian was seen as ‘an organ of the middle class’, or in the words of c.p.
this makes them almost like some bacteria.
this explains why people wanted to live there.
many political problems can be solved by asking the people their opinion because the supporters of the argument will be forced to accept the decision of the people.
later on this had to be reversed.
it may also be because the only road enters that foreign place before coming back to the mother country.
in general use, an enclave can be any special area of a bigger area of land, such as a part of a city that has different taxes than the rest of the city.
see also list of countries that border only one other country.
what people mean when they talk about panhandles is a narrow strip of land, that is surrounded on all sides except one, by one or more countries or regions.
the strip of land is connected to the country or region it belongs to on one side only.
a park is an open place in a city or town for nature.
these are usually large areas of land.
they swim on top of the water and eat plants off the bottom of ponds, lakes, or oceans.
it can be killed by adding preservatives like sulfur dioxides, or by getting rid of the air when the wine is stored.
the new church called itself the church of england, and now the archbishop is the leader of that church.
this is the case for most animals and plants that can be seen (without the use of a microscope).
it was also said about south america.
they are found in many parts of the world.
they live in families and eat vegetables.
the mother will pull fur a couple of days before they are born, to make a bed for the babies.
they can live in the cold, but they would rather be kept inside a warm house or near a heater in a barn.
he is also well known for his way of keeping milk and wine from going sour for longer.
a transcontinental country is a nation that is on more than one continent.
they can be in one continent, but have a culture that is similar to that of another continent.
they have a long body with an extended tail with a sting.
how scorpions survive in the desert.
this allows them to survive on as little as one insect per year.
many people also believe that their claws, or pincers, were once front legs that have turned into what they now are by going through evolution.
this means that it can be used to either kill or paralyze the victim.
it is partially covered by hairs that help the scorpion keep balance.
there is a model of a computer that is used for this.
the area is also rich in oil and gas.
in the early days of the typewriter, up to the early 1900s, people said that the person typing the letters was a typewriter.
those people became later known as typists.
a censor is a person whose job is to look at all types of media and remove material.
the fifth set is played until 15 points.
in the morning, dawn is when it is not dark any more, and the light of the sun is just starting to appear.
it began with the wall street crash of 1929.
this ended the wealth of the roaring twenties.
the day that is said to have started the great depression is called black tuesday.
roosevelt got the government to pass many new laws and programs to help people who were hurt by the great depression.
the men were paid 1 dollar a week to work, and they got free food and shelter.
the outside parts include
what led to the building of the wall.
a mistake by the press officer meant the border was opened several hours before it should have been.
this image of people in west berlin hitting the wall is often said to be east berliners breaking out.
this lead to a public outcry.
what the wall was made of.
the wall was changed and added to several times.
the whole was done in an a zone of between 30 and 500 m wide.
the only way they could do so was to race through the wall or try to dig a tunnel underneath.
the same was of course applied to those people who had shot border police on their flight.
border guards who did shoot, and stop someone from fleeing could get a reward of up to 500 marks.
portland has the second most people of any city in the northwest united states, after the city of seattle.
it used to be of great importance, because of the value of the spices nutmeg and "mace".
both spices are from the same tree.
this turns out to be like a pyramid.
there is a single person or thing at the top level.
at the bottom are the common workers.
in these examples, people who are higher up have more authority and power than people below them.
it is one of the two official languages of finland.
this means that words in finnish have a stem called "body", and many parts inside them that make up meaning.
a case is an ending added to a word that helps describe its purpose in the sentence.
most small children and many adults sleep for a short time, called a nap, in the early afternoon.
the details are not fully understood, but it is important to get enough sleep for the body and the brain to be healthy and work properly.
certain animals send out signals to the others that they will soon go to sleep.
both humans and many animals sleep about once a day.
when people sleep they often have dreams.
most dreams take place in this phase.
the timing of sleep and the amount of it are both important.
both are different for different people.
some sleep best from midnight to seven or eight.
how much sleep is enough also depends on age.
children need more sleep than adults.
newborn babies sleep about 18 hours per day.
at the age of 1 year, they sleep for about 14 hours.
adults who sleep less than about 8 hours a day perform worse than those who sleep that long.
people may have trouble going to sleep, staying asleep or getting enough sleep.
this usually means that they are too sleepy in the daytime.
there are many things that influence sleep.
there are many diseases that cause poor sleep - some do because of side effects.
greece and the republic of macedonia are arguing over the name macedonia.
what is now macedonia used to be a state called socialist republic of macedonia in the southern part of the country of yugoslavia.
they try to lose weight by eating too little and doing too much exercise.
this causes them to stay at a weight that is not normal for their age and height.
people do not have to show all four signs for the doctor to decide that they have anorexia.
in most countries, being able to tell if something is wrong is the basis for criminal law.
an animal can also be called mad, if that animal suffers from rabies.
the usual form of getting is a bite of a rabid mammal.
there is also a form of treatment that can be done once a person has been bitten.
it starts with washing the wound.
it is the largest city in that country.
other people think there may be up to 1 millon people who live in the city.
a person that can not speak using sound is called a "mute".
a person who chooses not to speak can also be said to be mute.
it is played by two or four people in a table.
mindanao is one of the three main island groups in the philippines.
it may also refer to the second largest island in the philippines; the main island in the group.
the area of the table under the pot gets hot.
heat from the pot moved to the table top by conduction.
but it is great for small electronics because it is small and it has no moving parts.
the main weakness of flash memory is the number of times that data can be written to it.
but it is more expensive than flash, so it is usually not used for storage greater than 128kb.
these four areas are under one name because they were all once ruled by the french.
a critic is a person who reviews things like movies, books, and food to see if they are any good and if other people would like them.
they may say good or bad things about what they are reviewing.
a 'critical moment' may be a moment which will show whether something is going to work or not.
despotism is a form of government that is controlled by one person or a small group of people.
the person who controls the state is called a "despot".
it is important to wear a riding helmet when riding.
it is easy for a person to fall off a horse and hit his or her head.
horses can accidentally step on a person who has fallen to the ground.
a birthday is the day when a person was born.
most of the time, the number of candles is the same as the age of the birthday person.
a birthday can give a person new responsibilities and rights.
the city is on the right bank of the red river.
in 2005 the first of the books was made into a movie.
the name comes from two words in a language called old norse.
if someone wants to talk about two or more followers of asatru, they would say that they are "asatrufolk".
otherkin are people who believe that part of them is not human inside.
some otherkin say that they are vampires, by which they mean that they need to drink blood or take the energy away from people in order to stay healthy.
a few of them say that their physical bodies are not human, either, but there is no proof either for or against that.
what it means in great britain.
in japan, large fires called bon-bi are set to welcome the return of the spirits of the ancestors.
the idea was that the fire would purify.
such cattle was led through the smoke of a bonfire.
coals from a bonfire would be taken home to light the fires in family hearths.
in some places there is only one day of celebration.
on that day, many people go to church and have some ash smeared on their forehead as a sign of sorrow for their sins.
then for 40 days, they try to work hard on improving themselves and thinking about the teachings of jesus.
this was the day just before lent.
during the middle ages in europe, it was normal for people to have a big feast on the tuesday before the lenten fast started.
he is about to do battle with lent.
every part of the procession is ruled by a tradition, but some of the traditions are so old that no-one remembers what they mean anymore.
at the beginning of the procession is a large group of people dressed in beautiful costumes of silk and velvet, who act out an historic scene of the coming of the king of spain and his royal court to brussels 500 years ago.
different uses of the word "carnival".
some towns have carnivals that have nothing to do with lent and are at different times of year.
fasting is a kind of abstinence.
it is when someone does not eat or drink for some specified period of time.
it is only the case if the person does so of his or her own will.
it may also be that the person only eats and drinks certain kinds of food.
fasting for religious and spiritual reasons has been a part of human custom since pre-history.
these are made for the following groups of people
however she was not made a saint until 1 may in the same year, and that day carries her name in the swedish calendar.
when the travel to that mountain is too far, they may also chose another hill in the region they live.
it is made of the milk of cows.
it will go bad if it is not kept in the refrigerator.
the food safety authorities in the u.k.
a cult is a religious group of people.
what religious group is or is not a cult is often only a matter of personal opinion.
that opinion may change over time.
what is at one point in time considered a cult may later be accepted as a religion.
this is not always the case though.
as they got more followers and became more accepted in society, they became religions.
there are also many religions that began as sects and over time became their own separate religion.
this may or may not be true.
most of his 40 books are very large sagas.
they are about the lives of many generations in a particular place.
michener wrote that he did not know who his parents were or exactly when and where he was born.
he taught there for several years.
the final battle of the war took place in january of 1815.
both sides thought they had won, but no great changes took place.
when cool water goes to an edge of a pie pan, the water is dense.
it flows around and back to the center.
another example are the clouds and the earth.
they form when rocks are broken down or weathered.
some are made for soldiers to use in war.
some are made for police to have in case they need them.
the largest one is great nicobar.
they cause a lot of damage to anything they touch.
people die every year from tornadoes.
people should never be in a car or a mobile home when there is a tornado near.
it usually means people making very big, complicated things that take a lot of steps to finish.
it all starts with an idea.
animal by-products are the parts of the animals that cannot be eaten by humans.
he can sense danger with his "spider-sense".
peter will discover later that they were spies and worked for the us government.
he has been raised by his uncle ben and his aunt may and has always been loved.
this event changed peter into the amazing spider-man.
days of our lives
the main families on the show have the last names "brady" and "horton".
they liked the flute and other instruments better than the recorder.
these instruments are louder than the recorder and are better for playing difficult music.
one reason was that people wanted to play old music on old kinds of instruments.
a second reason was that the recorder is a good instrument for children to learn about music.
people have found some whistles that were made in the iron age.
it has holes for seven fingers and one thumb.
it also has one end bigger than the other.
they also wanted them to play more difficult music.
in the picture at the top of the page, one of the recorders is in three parts.
flutes are good for playing music which has a large range of notes.
flutes are also better for playing music which needs many chromatic notes.
in the 1900s people wanted to play old music with old kinds of instrument.
the lowest note of most recorders is either c or f. this is the note that is heard when the player covers all the finger holes and the thumb hole.
many people enjoy playing in large groups.
groups often play music that is written for several different sizes of instrument.
it is the largest city in the country.
when there is a lot of snow on a mountain, some of the snow may come down the mountain, for some reason.
this is then called an avalanche.
people talk about avalanches because they may be dangerous to skiers, and other people doing winter sports.
they may bury people under them.
foot is a unit of measurement of length (how long something is).
it is one of the u.s.
sometimes it is called a "u.s.
it is most often used to describe areas of land.
that part of the mountain was all rock and ice, and it killed almost 17,000 people in small towns around the mountain.
he spoke the language of the people who lived near him and played with the children.
at each end of the field are 4 poles.
belaying is a way to hold and control a rope for a person who is rock climbing.
a person on the ground who is belaying is called a "belayer".
the belayer can hold the whole weight of the climber by using only a little force, and can even stop a long fall.
there are many people who can be called arabs by these points who do not think of themselves as arab.
it has a number of carriages that travel on a set of tracks.
body modification (or body alteration) is when a person changes their body in a way that lasts forever or for a long time.
they believe that if someone changes their body, it is wrong and they are doing something dangerous or unethical.
religions might tell people that they should change their bodies to look a certain way.
this loss of soil is often called erosion.
blood moves from the heart to arteries, which branch and narrow into smaller arteries, and then branch more into capillaries.
he is considered one of the most important angolan poets of his time.
after some time he and others, did not agree with some people in the group and this led to fighting in the streets of leopoldville.
his ideas were not the same as the maoists.
he was very brave and did not change his ideas.
this may be because he could have made trouble for their work in africa.
his dead body was taken away in a military vehicle and his burial was without any ceremony.
they usually wash with a sponge.
there are 3 different kinds of sponges.
the difference between these kinds is in how their skeleton is made.
this class contains most of the sponges.
there are about 500 different kinds of glass sponges, in 17 different families.
the distance from the top of one peak to the bottom of another is called "peak-to-peak amplitude".
a debate has started on how to make braille more attractive and for more teachers to be available to teach it.
a switch is a something that changes the flow of a circuit.
his first job was a lawyer.
he became best known as a leading thinker in new ways of looking at the world.
his writings started and made famous a way of thinking about science.
it is based on looking at the world by making experiments.
after watching the results the scientist comes up with an idea to explain what has happened.
three months and twelve days from their landing from the "bear" at
she was a lonely child and read a lot of books and poetry.
coat of arms
the grant of arms is usually allowed only when issued by the government of a country or its agent.
some kinds of spears were also meant to be thrown.
most countries have their own stamps.
the ussr thought that this meant they could make sure the countries did what they wanted.
they said his health was bad and that he did not see too well.
tries to set up a school for journalism.
he wanted to convince people of his ideas.
he thought that the role of a journalist must be to convince people with sound arguments.
people can usually just say "alabama" or "ua" for short when they are talking about the university.
the engineer may take an idea and turn it into a useful thing for other people to use.
it is a rule of mathematics.
this festival is the most important festival in spain.
he also built the city of st.
he was part of the enlightenment.
music without notes might be sound effects.
flat and sharp signs are always written before the note.
a way to remember this when writing or playing music is to say: if the sign came after the note, it would be too late, and you would have already played it, so it must go before so that you know what is coming up.
in a bar there are usually shown as 4/4 and you count 1 2 3 4 each bar.
someone who is sent money with this system can send it to other people, or withdraw it into a bank account.
he did not recognize the tribunal, and said he was being tried for standing up to nato expansion.
one example is the fir tree.
one of his gags is that he swoons and falls in love with every girl he sees.
army comes up to him and says that the nazis are trying to find the ark of the covenant.
jones finds the right place and starts digging, finding it in a place called the well of souls.
marion tries to comfort him by saying that she will buy him a drink.
he has black hair and eyes.
through most of the show he is wearing a hat and jacket.
this love for the fiddle has gone together with a kind of dancing called jigging.
some say these were not really rebellions.
the winner of the fa cup usually goes through to the uefa cup of the following season.
a stadium is a building in which lots of people may watch an event.
a disaster is the something very bad that happens to people and almost always changes their lives completely.
to live through a disaster, it is important that your family and your city prepare in advance.
this may be making a pack of things you need in an emergency, it may be a government sending soldiers to help, or it may be something in between.
he would only play 26 games over the next three seasons because of problems with his knees.
the names given to each eon describe something about that time, or the rocks that were made at that time.
it was written thousands of years ago.
he will not be led into the underworld for ever for his sins because he will now be reincarnated.
they are place at the end of the vedas and they primarily deal with knowledge or wisdom.
they describe the fact that the humans should try to learn more, and understand more, about god.
they may take place in a field or in a stadium.
a group of concerts in one place or in one area that takes place for several days may be called a “festival”.
before the days of recording a concert would have been the only opportunity most people would have of hearing concerts given by groups.
palm trees are a family of plants.
most of them are trees but some are shrubs.
they grow in hot climates, but some have been planted as far north as britain.
they have had an important role to humans throughout much of history.
most of these grow in the subtropics.
the fruit is usually a single seed surrounded by flesh.
some kinds form pure stands in areas with poor drainage or regular flooding.
at least a hundred kinds are in danger, and nine kinds are said to have recently died out..
it is very hard to save palm seeds because they are killed by cooling them, which is the normal way of keeping rare seeds for the future.
the group gathered a lot of information from different parts of the world.
they are mentioned more than 30 times in the bible, and more than 22 times in the koran.
palm oil, sago, heart of palm and palm wine are all eaten or drunk in different parts of the world.
palm leaves are also valuable to some peoples as a material for thatching or clothing.
jews also had a tradition of carrying palm branches during festive times.
the palm tree is also used for the stereotypical view of an oasis.
not many plants grow on them.
hera is a goddess of love and marriage in greek mythology, and is one of the twelve olympians.
she also the wife and sister of zeus.
she is the queen of the gods.
she has two so called weapons that are prophecy and trickery.
her powers are commanding the winds and watching over women and motherhood.
hera tried to kill him when he was a baby with the titans.
he did this by putting the heart in the womb of semele.
dionysis was then born for a second time
she put a curse on her that meant that she could only speak the words of other people after she had heard them.
it is due to this story that we get the meaning behind the word "echo".
hera was not fooled and said that zeus had to give her the heifer as a present.
lamia was a queen of libya who zeus was in love with.
hera choose this curse because she wanted lamia to always think about the picture of her dead children.
zeus then gave lamia the gift of being able to take her eyes out, so that she could rest.
she could then put them back in again afterwards.
one common "plane mirror" is a piece of special flat glass that a person can look into in order to see themselves or what is behind them.
the reason you are able to see yourself in a mirror is because light comes in and gets reflected, and that's how you're able to see your reflection.
some make you look quite strange.
it was called a model t.
his family had plenty of money because his father owned a business running corn mills.
a beautiful mind
this is different from certain optical illusions, which do not work anymore once you can see it.
in order to get the right feeling into this painting, he had himself tied to a ship's mast during a storm, so that he could see what it was like.
some people complained that the pictures he painted when he was older were not realistic, and some even joked that they could have been painted with a mop.
they shared their ideas about painting.
when this picture was shown in 1874 one critic took its title and called the group of artists "impressionists".
he intended to make fun of the artists, but the name has stuck and this is what people today call this style of painting.
if you go very close to one of his pictures it is hard to see what it shows, but if you stand back everything becomes clear.
it is about how the hebrew people were led out of egypt by god.
exodus starts with the birth of moses, and how the hebrew people were made slaves by a new pharaoh of egypt when they lived there.
the pharaoh made the hebrews work for them very hard.
as moses had no confidence in doing this task, god gives him his brother aaron to help him.
aaron was a good talker and helped moses speak to the pharaoh.
when he returned to egypt, moses asked the pharaoh to let the israelites go, but the pharaoh refused.
the last plague was the death of all the firstborns in egypt.
the pharaoh finally decided to let the israelites go.
god caused all pharaoh's troops to die while the israelites pass safely as moses parts the sea with his staff by god's power.
moses breaks the first two stone tablets of the ten commandments in anger.
god later gives him another two.
stretching is a word used to describe a kind of body modification.
it is when a person widens a pierced hole in their body.
it is difficult to accurately tell the number of deaths caused by the events at chernobyl.
when and if the people involved die of cancer, or related diseases, it will be hard to tell if this was because of the accident.
prypiat and the surrounding area will not be safe for people to live there for several centuries.
he always wanted to be just like stalin, so now he wanted to be the leader of communism.
animals are awake for some hours each day or night.
they are awake when they do not sleep.
animals which are awake during the day are called "diurnal".
animals which are awake during the night are called "nocturnal".
during the day they eat and move about.
people may work or go to school during the day.
sometimes they cannot remember their dreams, but sometimes they remember their dreams.
liu bei found that offensive, for he was a member of the royal family of han and considered himself the righteous emperor of china.
he even forced the emperor to move to the city chang'an as capital instead and burned luoyang.
all along the next nine years, he would have trouble with his brother sun ba who wanted to be crown prince instead.
for his follower was too young to rule on his own, the official zhuge ke became regent.
a conference is an event where people get together to discuss things.
another meaning of the word conference is when business people come together to talk about things.
then cattle is put on for "grazing".
it measures the area of something.
it was used to make rubber.
it is also used in many kinds of music to give the music a sense of feeling.
the olive tree is a small tree.
the branches in the flag of the united nations are those of an olive tree.
the olive tree is a sign of peace.
hello is a word used as a greeting in english.
it is used to welcome somebody.
when visiting other countries it is very good to know how to say "hello" in the language of the country, although many languages these days use the english word "hello".
it is very hot and humid in the summer and it is very cold and dry in the winter.
but the surrounding area is rich with natural resources, such as fish and natural gas.
the day is celebrated around the world every year, and every two or three years, a gathering is held at a different place.
in the gospel of matthew and the gospel of luke, it says that mary was a young woman who was engaged to be married to a man called joseph.
the gospel of luke says that an angel came to mary to tell her that she would give birth to a son and she should call him jesus and that he would save people from their sins.
when joseph found out that mary was pregnant, he thought about what he should do.
he decided to privately break the engagement.
but then he had a dream.
an angel told him that the baby was "the son of god".
everyone had to go back to the town that their family came from, to have their name put on the tax lists.
joseph took mary to bethlehem and she gave birth to the baby, jesus, in an animal shed, because there was no room for them.
as he was dying, he asked a young disciple to care for mary as if she was his own mother, and the disciple took her back to his home.
on the third day, as it says in the bible, mary went with other women to the grave where jesus had been laid, to wash his body with oil.
an angel told the women that jesus was not there.
blessed are you above other women and blessed is the child from your womb, jesus!"
there are 8 weapons in "quake."
some people consider scots to be a language and some consider it to be a form of english.
we can use limits to see what happens very close to things.
we can also use limits to see what happens when things get very big.
some of these roots may be the same.
they do a lot of damage to the places where they pass, by eating the crops.
they are part of the order of orthoptera.
an oil lamp is a lamp used for lighting.
the pattern here is that the "er" is removed from the verb and replaced with a different ending depending on the subject(who's doing the eating).
she was good at what she did, so she once claimed that her skill was better than that of athena.
so she appeared to the girl as an old woman, and warned her not to offend the gods.
she ran away and hanged herself.
it is a very common phobia - many people suffer from it.
people who have it usually do not want to go to anywhere they believe there are many spiders and do not want to get near spiders themselves, especially touch them.
in many cases, the fear may be because of something that happened with spiders when the sufferer was a small child and may not even remember.
it is hard to tell how many people suffer from phobias; numbers indicate though that between 5 and 13 percent seem to have a phobia.
there are different ways to help people with phobias.
the name is actually a pseudonym.
it has not rained in parts of it for over 400 years.
they need to be eaten rapidly, because the white bread goes bad very fast.
it is common to dip the bread into olive oil when it is eaten.
these facts will lead to knowledge.
reading a large number of books about a subject, and taking notes, is a form of research.
it is only open to people who have been invited and people visiting must be over eighteen years old.
it will be pointless for them to be told something they already know.
if they were told about something they knew little about, they would get much new information.
her books are very famous all over the world, and she sold a lot of books.
she uses logic to find out who is guilty for the murder.
he likes to find out who did the murder by thinking about all the evidence.
he got married when he was eighteen.
he died at the age of 61 after having painted many paintings.
they were able to get the ship onto a beach at what is now called cooktown.
it is difficult to work out the age of the great barrier reef.
this is because of the way a reef can grow and shrink as the sea level changes.
it started to grow on an older reef.
the plain had some large hills.
some of these hills were parts of older reefs.
there are not many living around the reef.
three of these are not found anywhere else.
they take about 4 years to become old enough to breed.
they usually live on the sea floor.
they live in warm waters up to deep.
the birds will learn to come to a specific place at specific times of day to be fed, and a regular light feeding during summer adapts them to coming to the feeding place in winter.
when a chick is missing, this call can go on for hours.
they begin to grow their "crowns" when they are only a few weeks old and it takes about a year for them to reach full size, though it may take three years to reach breeding age.
it is usually short (small in height), but long from front to back and with short legs.
some people believe that using those words does not show respect.
in fact, they can be much more loyal than other kinds of dogs.
it is also important to hold the dog the right way – by holding up the front and the rear parts of the body at all times.
some use letters to write out sounds, and others use characters to write out whole words that have many sounds in them.
it is at least 2,500 years old and it comes from china.
people disagree about what to call it because it means different things to different people.
taoists also believe that conflict is not good and that if you have a problem with something, it is better to find a way around it.
this is usually to make it better.
there are different ways to measure poverty.
they need to spend a lot of that money for living expenditures, so that at the end of the day, little of it is left.
there are different ways to tell if a country is rich or pooor.
they are often made of wood and are usually located in forest or mountain areas.
the city catches more fish than any other place in peru.
because a single tram can carry many people at the same time, riding on a tram instead of driving a car is a good way to help prevent pollution.
fast food is the term for a kind of food that people eat from a restaurant where you get what is called "junk food".
these foods are cooked and served very quickly, and that is why it is called "fast" food.
it can also lead to other health problems.
when a lot of fast food is eaten, it can be very bad for the person eating it.
it begins to burn very quickly.
nationalists think that the best way to make this happen is for every ethnic group to have its own nation or society that they can rule without being controlled or oppressed by anybody else.
they thought that it is wrong for somebody to live in great welfare that is made by hard work or even oppression of others.
new nations became nations with many ethnic groups, which do not want to or cannot live peacefully in the same society with the others.
crops and other plants need water to grow, and land animals need it to live.
many deaf people learn sign language so that they can communicate.
the sound of the end of the word "liver" in the name of the bird is like "driver" not "river".
there is a story that the birds will come alive if a truly pure woman walks between them.
a demonstration is an event where people do something to let others know what they think and to try to change people's point of view.
the chartists were people who wanted to get more rights for working class people in the mid-19th century.
they were an all man group.
a lot of the music they made was pop music or dance music.
she saw how busy her mother and father's lives were, and did not want that for herself.
when she was 10-years-old, her parents asked her if she wanted to write songs.
the name is not promoted very much in the united states because it sounds too much like 'hickey'.
it was written all by herself.
her music still sounded very r&b, but at this point it sounded more pop.
the album sold many copies in japan, but it did not sell that well in the united states.
this is the second time she has ever done this (despite her singing for eight years).
this is an example of new imperialism.
the last half of the 19th century saw a change in the way countries controlled their colonies.
this was seen in the fight for the areas that were controlled by european nations.
you can see it if it grows near the shore.
these prizes are often given by the people or group of people that give the game show money to run.
the people who give the game show money to run are called sponsors.
it has a special ink pouch that it uses to darken the water when it feels like it is in danger.
some of these were successful, others were not and led to the deaths of many emperors.
this meant that she could not defend herself well against her enemies if they would attack.
this help is known as the first crusade.
after the byzantines took back constantinople, they were too busy fighting the europeans who had betrayed them and could not find enough soldiers or money to fight the turks.
the byzatines lost so much land, money and soldiers that they became very weak and begged for help from the europeans.
if it is too long then the fingers can make playing difficult.
the tablature will only be looked at if the teacher is not sure of how to play a certain part.
if one did not have a teacher, then one had to work out the rhythm by themselves.
although such wood is very dry, it is not necessarily the best since it may be infected with wood worm or be of a bad quality or type.
the inside of the top board is hollowed out to a degree.
the strings are taken out and left to dry, before being cut into the appropriate length.
because there are not enough jobs, these people usually want to back to their states.
there are different kind of trolleys.
customers can put things they want to buy in the trolley and then pay for everything at the checkout.
usually they are then allowed to wheel the trolley with the things they have bought out to their car.
sometimes the customers have to pay a small deposit when collecting a trolley.
it was a way for them to tell stories that dealt with racism.
it could pass for generations without anyone knowing about it.
they fear what they do not understand.
they are jealous of them having superpowers.
it is set into the future.
they only problem they have is that the life form is the size of a planet.
system of a down
this album was not as big as the next album, but it made people aware of who and what system of a down stands for.
system of a down was trying to tell us what was going on, what the government isn't telling the public, and they have a reputation of doing so.
many fans thought of the double album as a let down, but others thought that it was a good idea to try new things.
in 2006, the band decided that they were going to go on break for a little while.
they said they were going to come back together in a few years.
they want to be sure people know that system of a down is not breaking up, they are just on a break because they have been doing system for almost 10 years.
this was known as a diktat.
during the war, the russian people had killed their king and put in a new leader who made the country into a communist state.
it is made up of several small islands.
it is in the state of texas.
it is the fourth largest city in the u.s.
some countries use colonialism to get more land for their people to live in.
it was made of many cities.
each city was a country of its own, with a government in place.
those cities also fought wars against each other and traded goods.
these people would then make a new city called a colony.
the local people are forced to become slaves and work on the farms.
the rich and powerful countries usually set up military forts or police forces to enforce the rules and laws of the colonizing country.
there may also be other parts that can change other sounds.
guitars are made and sold in many parts of the world by many companies.
usually, when people start playing guitar, it is a good idea to buy from a known company.
when beginning to play the guitar, there are certain basic facts that should be known and certain things to be done.
when first buying a guitar, it is useful to start with a known brand.
order of the bath
they did this on the day before they were made a knight.
members of the order now belong to either the civil or the military division.
a symbol of the order that is seen over and over has three crowns in it.
they have no country of their own.
they have a rich culture which is their own and despite the long struggle by its neighbouring enemies to demolish it: it remains a strong influence in their way of life.
they also have most of the other rites, but do not consider them to be sacraments
canada is the second largest country in the world in land area after russia and has the longest border with water (coastline) of any country in the world.
women were given the right to vote by the end of the war, partly because of the help they gave making weapons while the men fought in europe.
a large number of immigrants from almost every part of the world come to live in canada.
the head of state of the united kingdom is also the head of state in canada.
many people from other parts of the world think of canada as a very cold and snowy place.
border, most of which is often covered with snow about 6 months of the year.
20 can been used as a number base.
this means that most of the planet is made up of gas.
the reason why set theory was made is that collections of objects can cause problems if you work with them without explaining them better.
set theory begins by giving some examples of things that are sets.
then it gives rules with which you can make other sets from the already known sets.
it has 300,000 speakers but is in danger of dying because so many of them are old and not enough children are learning it.
the main building is the winter palace.
it is sometimes called jumbo jet because it is very large and is able to carry a lot of people.
winter springs is a city in florida.
it has been one of the most useful types of stone to humankind.
for many centuries, flint was one of the main ways for people in many countries to make fire.
it is the second largest town in kildare
it is used for sitting on.
they usually have four legs to support the weight.
some people find it fun to play games with the chairs that roll and spin.
he is the leader and a founding member of the super team the champions.
it tells the story of a boy named daniel (macchio) who moves with his mother from new jersey to california.
when crazy horse was first born he was given the name of curly.
when he was younger he had a vision when he wasn't supposed to and his family didn't know where he was.
his father found him and was very unhappy at what young curly had done.
his father then changed his own name to worm.
crazy horse had good medicine, so he was never killed when he went to battle.
he had no choice but to leave the black hills.
when he arrived at fort robinson, he was forced to give up his weapons and horses and was not happy.
cabrillo has two separate beach areas
the name of the language comes from the place where it is spoken.
people from different regions use different scripts.
it is like a valley, only on a very much smaller scale.
they were invented for soldiers to wear in the first world war, to keep them warm.
an early example of a brass instrument like a trumpet is called a shofar, which is still used in religious ceremonies.
trumpets were long and without valves.
everyone respected trumpet players because trumpets were just so difficult to play.
the food that is put in the oven has either a small amount of water or a large amount.
it is also used in some medicnes.
a fox is a small mammal.
a female fox may be called a vixen.
a food pyramid is a chart that can be used to see how many servings of each food should be eaten each day.
it is for having good health.
some people also call it the trunk.
they dig up plants in gardens and eat food out of garbage cans.
they dig a tunnel under the ground and then dig out a larger area at the end of the tunnel where they sleep and have their babies or pups.
sometimes they dig more than one den, so they can move if an enemy finds the den.
wolves used to eat coyotes, but there are not many wolves left in north america compared to the number of coyotes.
they are in the order insectivora.
that air is too cold and it is bad.
many people also live in the smaller villages around bedford.
there is a small hill now in the place where the castle used to be.
the town of bedford has some nice places to walk along the banks of the river great ouse.
the event lasts for two days.
it has a tall spire which can be seen from a long way away.
there was a church there in 1066.
it serves people from the whole of mid bedford.
many discussions are still taking place about the future of the hospital and how it should be organized.
there is a lot of opportunity to hear music in bedford.
it is given by the royal philharmonic orchestra and attracts thousands of people who take rugs and food and sit on the grass to listen to the music.
as bedford has a river there is a lot of opportunity for rowing.
the m1 is 8 miles to the west, and the al is about the same distance to the east.
there are many italian people living in bedford.
there are many italian bars and restaurants and social clubs as well as a church and a vice-consulate.
many of the people who came in the 1950s now have grandchildren growing up in bedford, and many of them have married people from other cultures.
the town of kempston has now grown to be part of bedford.
there are also many smaller villages in the borough.
it is well known that a man ejaculates when he has an orgasm.
it takes some time before he can have another erection and ejaculation.
men who are 18 years old have a refractory period of about 15 minutes, while men in their 70s have one of about 20 hours.
most young and middle-aged men can probably have about two to three ejaculations in a few hours, but it has been said that some men are able to have up to nine ejaculations a day.
a man who is unable to ejaculate at all is said to have anejaculation.
this is called a dry orgasm.
a man with oligospermia or azoospermia is usually infertile, and cannot or finds it very hard to make a woman pregnant by having sex with her.
if the person that the man has sex with touches the semen, he or she can become infected by the germs and pick up the disease.
one of the ways for a man to lower the chance of passing on an sti to his sexual partner is to wear a condom on his penis when having sex.
to avoid the woman becoming pregnant when she does not want to, the man and the woman can use methods of contraception or birth control.
the first time a boy ejaculates usually happens when he is asleep.
when a boy starts to ejaculate, he usually produces only a small amount of semen.
it is usually clear and stays sticky.
), and by doctors and people who study anatomy.
many doctors and scientists now agree that there is such a thing as female ejaculation, but do not know much about how it happens or how the woman's body makes the fluid ejaculated.
a team is a group of people who have a certain task to complete.
unsuccessful team - a group of people who have a very difficult time when attempting to complete a certain task.
he helped japan make many important changes that made it become a rich country it is today.
the people of japan thought that their emperor was a god before this time, but the general said that hirohito had to tell his people that he was not a god.
a lot of people study it and this study affects and involves several fields, for example the study of genes.
the theory says that some apes started walking on two legs and began to use their hands to carry things about 5 million years ago.
then they got separated from each other and became different.
there were two or three different groups of walking apes, and one was the forefather of humans.
the science that is concerned with finding out how this happened is called "paleoanthropology".
by 1859, people had found out that humans were in some respect very similar to some of the great apes.
common ancestors of humans and great apes.
the figure shows where some of them lived and at what time.
the main find was a skeleton believed to be a woman of about 30 years of age.
people feel differently about globalization: some think it helps everyone while others think it hurts some people.
this sometimes means that some people lose their jobs.
people who support globalization also believe that it makes war less likely because it is bad for business.
friedman believed that no two nations with a mcdonald's would ever go to war with each other.
the report also said that people in poorer nations are living longer and better because they were making more money.
it is traditional music that people learn by listening to other people playing it and then copying them.
this music is sometimes called “folk”.
this means that small communities such as villages or families would relax by playing and singing music together.
people would often make up a new song or new piece of music, or make changes to music that they already knew.
in this way music was always changing.
people would get musical ideas from other groups nearby.
this is how stories were handed down from one generation to another.
there were two or more parts (voices).
they often used some of these ideas in their music.
this is because he is their ancestor.
abraham is the father of isaac and the grandfather of jacob.
abraham was the third son of terah and the grandson of nahor.
the title can mean "the book of the way and its virtue."
the language is not clear - the author wanted it to be unclear because he is talking about things that are hard to describe.
there are many interpretations, or ways to understand what the book says.
it is important because it was one of the first places where humans lived together in a civilization.
the people of babylonia, or "babylonians", had a written language that they used to learn things about the world around them.
they wrote down the things they learned and this helped the young babylonians learn more than the older babylonians knew.
he fought wars and made babylonia bigger and created one of the earliest set of laws in the world.
noise is another word for sound.
it usually means it is not wanted.
karma is a word meaning the result of a person's actions as well as the actions themselves.
it make a person responsible for their own life, and how they treat other people.
the law of karma puts man at the center of responsibility for everything he does and everything that is done to him.
most of those bombs are used far more often to commit basic arson.
when someone sets fire to a property (a building) they do not own and they want to cause damage, it is called arson.
it often happens after breathing dust or other small things into the nose.
these plastics may be woven into a cloth and used in layers, which makes them even stronger.
in many western countries, when teachers take children on an outing they may have to fill in a risk assessment form which lists all the possible dangers and says what they should do to stop bad things from happening (e.g.
all the pipes have to be made with an end that tapers at the bottom where the air blows in.
each pipe can play only one note which depends on its size.
the wind chests can be kept full in two ways.
a small organ may have just one keyboard, but many organs have two keyboards and a very big one may even have five.
apart from the manuals there are two other important parts of the console.
the stops can be pulled out or pushed in.
when a stop is pulled out, it turns on some sets of pipes.
this can happen in several ways.
this is quite difficult to use.
the fourth manual is called the "solo" because the stops on this manual are used to play out the tune as a solo.
if there is a fifth manual it may be called the "echo" because it has very quiet stops that echo.
for instance: a state trumpet or pontifical trumpet might be placed on this manual which can be heard above all the other stops playing.
however, the largest organ in the world doesn't work since it would be too expensive to run it.
having two or three manuals makes it possible to have quick changes of sound during a piece.
organists usually like to keep a pair of shoes which are worn only for playing the organ so that the soles do not have grit or dirt from the street.
the stops on an organ console give different sounds, like the instruments of an orchestra, and have names which tell the organist what kind of sound they will produce.
the stops of an organ can be divided into families.
if the number is 8 this is called an “eight foot stop”.
a 16 foot stop will sound an octave lower than an 8 foot stop.
mutation stops are stops in which a note does not sound a whole number of octaves above the normal pitch.
each organ is different and has its own character.
the combination of stops that an organist chooses for a particular piece of music is called the “registration”.
the list of all the stops that a particular organ has is called the “specification”.
the specification of an organ shows the names of the stops for each of the manuals and for the pedals, as well as the list of couplers.
the stops control the air flow through the ranks.
some stops may control more than one rank.
this means that organists need to know a lot about what organs were like in other countries in other centuries in order to know what registrations to use when playing music by composers of the past.
the organ in the middle ages.
it could be put on a table.
the baroque period was a great period for organ music in germany.
this would have sounded very loud and was used for dialogues and fugues.
pieces for organ were called voluntaries.
people also started to be interested in playing the music of j.s.
arranged music written for other instruments so that it can be played on the organ.
there is now 1 school that teaches all of its lessons in manx.
the back legs are also longer than the front legs.
it is easy to make at home, and it is also sold already made in supermarkets as a common food or as a snack for children and people that have dentures or other problems with their teeth.
parents often feed it to their babies because teeth are not needed to eat it.
by the time he grew into a young man, his father was already at war with parliament.
he was defeated, but he was not caught by the enemy because he hid in an oak tree.
he kept his own royal court there until 1660.
cromwell was very strict and did not allow the people to enjoy themselves, so they soon grew tired of him.
many of his enemies were punished for having executed his father and fought against him, but richard cromwell was allowed to go and live quietly away from london.
some people thought that a king should be more serious and not spend so much time and money on pleasure.
there were also some people who did not like king charles ii because of his religious beliefs.
they did not have any children, but charles refused to divorce catherine because he loved her and he did not agree with divorce.
if this had been true, then james would have been allowed to be king when charles died.
there were many who wanted this to happen, because they did not like the thought of charles's younger brother being the next king.
it can also be used as an adjective.
a pimp is a man who controls one or more prostitutes, in order to make money from them.
the genitals are the main parts of the human body that make men and women different.
all animals have some kind of sex organs.
in fact, the genitals are the main parts of the human body that make men and women different.
this is a chemical that makes a person grow into a man and feel like a man.
this is why it is very difficult for a man to urinate when he is having an erection.
young boys can have erections, but their bodies do not start producing sperm until they have reached puberty.
this usually happens when they are in their teens.
the part of a woman's genitals that is on the outside of her body is called the vulva.
some women are born without a hymen.
in some cultures, a broken hymen is taken as a sign that a girl has had sex.
the ovaries also produce the female hormone estrogen which causes a person to grow into a woman and to feel like a woman.
when the feelings are at their strongest, the man is said to be having an orgasm.
others think that the female orgasm causes the vagina to hold on to the penis more tightly, which makes sex more exciting for the man and causes him to ejaculate more quickly or to produce more semen; or that it encourages a woman to have sex more often as it feels good.
after the man has ejaculated, the blood flows out of his penis and it becomes smaller and soft again.
and many people own them or show them.
their fur does not shed as much as some dogs, so they are a good dog for people who are allergic to dogs.
there were great poets who wrote in irish.
it is not spoken by most irish people outside the gaeltacht for day to day life, but a lot of people speak it daily also or when among friends or family.
the goal was to send a human to explore the moon and bring him home to earth safe.
a space race is a period in history when two countries compete or have a race to explore space.
a space race can be for reasons of war or just for exploration.
this all happened at a time called the cold war when the usa and the soviet union were always very close to war.
after they proved it was possible for people to live in space they moved on.
but less than year after it began it was replaced with the apollo program.
they had planned for the space shuttles to cost less as they could be used more than once.
but eventually it turned out the space shuttles were more expensive as building them in the first place cost more money than normal.
people who believe in advaita believe that their soul is never really different from god.
he realized that many people would ask him, "if a person's soul is really one with god all along, then what makes a person feel so separate from god?"
his answer to this was that we are ignorant of our real self being god because we see through a kind of filter -- like looking through a dirty piece of glass -- and he called this filter we look through, "maya", which means "illusion" in sanskrit.
shankara said that our ignorance makes us feel very separate from god, and even from everything around us.
shankara suggested that the best way people can find the truth is for them to try to clear their thinking of all ignorant thoughts, be very good, and think very hard about who they really are.
he said that if a person did all these things he would realize that god was himself all along.
this is a very different idea from some other religions where we are told we are separate from god and need to go to him.
in advaita, the idea is that people never really were separate from god, but their ignorance made them see it that way.
many others believe there is a difference between a person's soul and god, just like in many other religions.
physical anthropology deals primarily with looking at how the human body has changed over the course of time.
the territory may be large enough to hold some young adults who live with their parents until they have their own territory.
the town was shown as mesquaki-nins.
people who have it do not look after themselves enough any more, this is called self-neglect.
the nato countries did not agree as it would destroy the purpose of nato.
they can have many different colours.
the grass roots
they give the dogs food and drinks if a dog is good one might get to feed them a dog biscuit or a jerky treat but be careful, don't feed them to many of these wonder treats because then the dog won't want to walk anymore.
one can find out how to compete in these contests by looking at their care books, under supplies.
at the start of the game one can choose a type of dog and give it a name.
however you can only have three dogs at home.
to get more you must drop off one at the dog hotel.
most of the work on raid is based on a paper written in 1988.
this means that people who use the computers sometimes do not know where the information is stored.
this can take a long time.
this does not mean that the data has been written to the disk.
this does not mean that there will not be faults, as each block of data is only found on one disk.
in this case, this is the time needed to get a block of data.
this makes the whole system more reliable, as it is able to survive and repair the failure.
for each block of data, there will be three places on the disks.
this was used with very large computers.
this is easy to do with xors.
with this approach it is possible to protect against any number of failed disks.
raid 6 is for the case of using two checksums to protect against the loss of two disks.
most things are done in hardware.
there are different ways to make a raid.
it is a word that is used to talk about systems that are fault-tolerant.
it means that there are things that are there several times.
the tradition was that he was at one point freed from slavery and that he eventually died at the hands of delphians.
these boxes are still used today.
his wife is the goddess parvati.
people make this hole so that they can put jewellery through the hole later.
the biggest of these stars we know of are called hypergiants and smaller ones are called supergiants.
they cool and shrink down into a white dwarf.
when the star explodes, it will be brighter than all other stars.
but we do not have to be afraid.
there are no stars big enough near the earth.
bethlehem is a city on the west bank in palestine.
it is most famous as the place where jesus was born.
disco clubs have a large dance floor and a large pa system.
he is the only son and second child of rainer and his wife grace kelly.
most of them live in the state of oaxaca.
it also included a system of writing.
if it is public knowledge then it is exoteric.
since one cannot know what another person is thinking, one can say that what one thinks is esoteric if one keeps it to oneself.
if one opens one's mouth and talks then it becomes public knowledge and is no longer esoteric but exoteric.
it seems that esotericism has to do with being able to keep a secret.
one cannot be a member of a secret fraternity.
one will not be trusted by a group made up of only a select few.
there is a general saying in esotericism that goes something like this: those who know do not talk and those who talk do not know.
people who know how to keep a secret do not tell others.
the more one can talk about what one is thinking, the more one can leave something unsaid: this is very esoteric and very few people notice.
it has longer legs and a look very similar to a lynx.
their ears are controlled by 20 different muscles, to help them find the animals they hunt.
a caracal may live without drinking for a long time - they get the water from the body of the animals they eat.
it is not easy to see caracals in nature because they hide very well.
they thought the babies were a different species.
the orders are divided into 19 families.
where this tradition comes from is unclear.
it is a special day because it remembers jesus.
the event happened nearly two thousand years ago on the calvary, near jerusalem, and his death on the cross, which is painful because nails are used to put him on the cross, is known as the cruxifixion.
most of them can survive at very high or very low temperatures.
his father was a doctor and his mother was a teacher.
diamond is famous for knowing a lot about the birds that lived on that island, and he has traveled there many times.
one of his first books was called "the third chimpanzee", which talked about the way that people evolved from monkeys, and how many things are the same between humans and monkeys.
in his book, diamond explained why he thought that different parts of the earth had people on them at different times, and why some people in some parts of the world had more science or farming than people in other parts of the world.
the book went over thousands of years of human history.
in this book, diamond wrote about why he thought that some groups of people from many hundreds of years ago were able to have their groups get very big and strong, while other groups fell apart.
his book talked about what people today can maybe learn from the studying the problems from history.
the inc says it was made by jesus christ.
the church does not believe in the religious teachings of the trinity, including the teaching that jesus is god.
he said that god gave him a mission to teach the gospel and to bring back the first church made by jesus.
it has now spread to many different countries.
she believed that people should run their own lives, and that everyone should be equal.
in 1917 she was arrested and spent two years in prison for not supporting world war i.
computer engineers think of how best to make these parts using what they have, and how to make the parts smaller and better.
almost 20 years of his life he spent in munich and turin.
we know about 400 of his poems.
because a man never can understand another person.
it is used to treat anemia.
he is most famous for what he did in the second punic war.
he kept an army in italy for many years.
he lost and the romans made him leave carthage.
hannibal is listed as one of the greatest military commanders in history.
he begged to go with his father.
it was captured after eight months.
he fought his way north to the pyrenees.
hannibal got away from a roman force sent to fight him in gaul.
he had arrived with only half the forces he had started with and only a few elephants.
he moved his army to italy by sea in time to meet hannibal.
he had gotten rid of the only force that could stop him from getting to rome.
he had placed himself between the romans and their source of supply.
the romans raised a new army that was much larger than ever before.
he was determined to defeat hannibal.
the roman army had no was to escape.
this makes the battle of cannae one of the worst defeats in the history of ancient rome.
it is also one of the bloodiest battles in all of human history in terms of the number of lives lost within a single day.
they tried instead to defeat him by attrition.
he continued defeating the romans whenever he could bring them into battle but was never able to complete another decisive victory.
they did not do well against the romans.
the same number of men were taken as prisoners.
at libya on the eastern shore of the sea of marmora, he was going to be turned over to the romans.
there are also differences between their teeth and the way they move their arms.
they also try to avoid products that have been tested on animals.
so a lot of food, land and water is wasted by keeping animals for food.
it is usually not considered a good act and is illegal in many places, but not all.
it tells the story of pinocchio, a wooden puppet that is brought to life by a fairy.
everyone is happy and they celebrate.
he was going to act more grown-up and do bad things on purpose, instead of being tricked into doing bad things.
the only parts of him that still looked like a puppet were his arms and legs.
that was the only thing about him that was like an insect."
pearls are often used for jewelry.
it is owned by time warner.
freedom of religion
if a country has freedom of religion, people there can either belong to any religion they choose, or belong to no religion; leave any religious group as well as join any religious group; take any peaceful religious actions their faith requires; and join with other people for religious purposes.
he turned into a red truck.
there is certainly more than one ruler under each name.
a long time ago it was the most powerful kingdom in the near east and present-day pakistan after alexander the great conquered most of the world that was known in europe.
until the day before he became president.
however it was not a long dynasty.
the word is now thought by many people as a regular word, no longer as an acronym.
the most common place you will find the color olive is on an olive.
there are 13 countries of this region.
a system is an object or a group of objects that is being studied.
there is also a growing number of films which are in english.
the golden girls
it was about a group of older women, who live in the same house in florida.
bark of different plants and trees can look very different, it can be rough or smooth and can have different colors.
she was the first woman to ever have this job.
most churches do it to infants to mark their becoming members of the church.
jesus was baptized by john the baptist.
he made taxes smaller and did not force his people to be soldiers for a long time.
he was the second son of king tang.
the landing area is in the back and has a short runway.
it was in this book that the name "googol" was first used.
the jubilee line of 1979 was to be the first part of the project, but because of the lack of money the line stayed the same until the late 1990s.
it needs to be treated immediately.
people that know first aid are expected to help as much as they can.
they will happen close to home and not to complete strangers.
they are events in which runners will not have to "pace themselves", but can run as fast as possible for the entire distance.
they are very strong and like to run in open spaces.
the wave is longer than light which humans can see and shorter than microwaves.
their marriage made spain into one kingdom.
the reason that the period is called by this name is that, at that time, people started taking an interest in the learning of ancient times, in particular the learning of ancient greece and rome.
a person who is clever at a great number of things is sometimes called a "renaissance man".
the renaissance started in italy but soon spread across the whole of europe.
in italy the time is divided into three periods:-
they were so expensive that most people could not own them.
even if an ordinary person went to the church and looked at a book there, they could not read them, because they were written in latin, the language of the ancient romans that was used in the catholic church and only understood by priests and well-educated people.
in the year 1400, in the city of rome, people could wander around looking up at the ruins of a city that had once been great.
a lot of them were pulled down to use as building stone.
but they showed people what great things could be done.
it was lots of little states, all governed in different ways and all fighting or making allies with each other all the time.
because of his very great importance as a spiritual leader, most people and most cities did not want to argue with the pope, whichever pope he might be.
because a new pope was elected when the old one died, everyone who was rich and powerful was always hoping it might be a member of their family.
it was always a good idea to have several young men in the family trained as priests, just in case.
it was also a good idea to be good friends with other rich families.
one way to do this was to have lots of daughters and get them to marry rich powerful men from different cities.
the family were called the medici.
he invested his money very wisely and became rich.
a lot of water is needed to make cloth.
he was a "patriot" because he acted like a father to his city.
he became part of the town council.
he particularly needed the loyalty of all the farms and villages, because a city in a valley is easy for an army to attack.
cosimo built public buildings and when he had a palace built for himself, he had long stone seats built along the walls for the poor and the elderly to sit on.
he had four sons and five daughters.
he had been asked to come back and taker over from bowell.
the cup happens every four years.
the first one was in 1987.
it is a crime in the u.s.
for people in other countries to give money to u.s.
government about their deals with china.
), to a white house meeting with the president.
"i'd talk for five or 10 minutes and then we'd... go around the table and let people say whatever they wanted to say.
other martial arts can use kicks, although they limit them to attacks to the legs and to the lower parts of the body of the opponent.
he was a son of james i of england.
he took charles to spain in the hope of finding him a spanish princess as a bride, but they had a lot of problems on the journey and could not persuade the spanish king to give them his daughter as a wife for charles.
when charles became king, he decided that he did not like sharing the work of government with the people who were elected to parliament.
so his answer for this problem was to rule by himself for eleven years, without calling a parliament.
now that the king was at war, he needed more money than he actually had, so he had no choice but to call parliament again in 1640.
the members of parliament, angry about being left out for 11 years, did not want to vote for giving him money to fight his war, as much as they wanted to talk about what a terrible king he was.
this meant that once again he had to call a parliament, much as he hated to do so.
one of the first things they did was vote that the king had to call parliament, and could not shut them down again.
the parliament and the king then began to quarrel about who was in control of the army.
charles escaped at one point and went to the governor of the isle of wight for protection, but this was also a bad move because he too was on the side of parliament and only captured the king again.
at the trial he was found guilty and was finally put to death by beheading in january 1649.
this parliament took complete power in england, and there was no new king at all until 1660.
pride and prejudice
joseph is the youngest of six children.
piracy is a crime that people do on ships which are at sea.
they use these boats to enter large ships, which are usually cargo ships.
"crew" is what the people are called that man a boat, and that work on that boat.
since the ships are huge, they usually carry a lot of money in the ship safe deposit.
this money is used to pay the crew, and to pay for the taxes to stay at a port, or to pass through a channel.
he was also a king of poland.
she was placed in a convent when she was young so that she could become a nun.
she had to leave the convent and was married to matthew of alsace.
usually it is made from the milk of sheep or goats.
he was very surprised to see that days later the milk had become solid.
he also found that as such a solid, it would go bad later than with milk.
it is diurnal, which means that it sleeps during the night and is awake during the day.
danger might be involved in carrying out the ritual.
these powers should be divided up so that each power would have a power over the other.
while he endorsed the idea that a woman could run a government, he thought that she could not be effective as the head of a family.
there are many different kinds of aristocracy with many different ways the government is set up.
what all of them have in common is that a small group of people have the political and legal power over a larger group.
members of the ruling group have been able to put their children in the ruling group.
he had many love affairs, although he was married to a amphitrite.
in some stories, he is believed to have been eaten by his father cronos, in other versions his mother rhea saves him by feeding her husband a small horse wrapped in a blanket.
poseidon also lived in his fathers stomach untill zeus made him throw him and his brothers and sisters up
the twelve olympians are the most important gods of greek mythology, who lived on top of mount olympus.
seventeen gods have been said to have been olympians, but there were never more than twelve at the same time.
the olympians became the most important gods when zeus and his brothers and sisters won a war against the titans.
it is based on a mistake by vasari.
he is one of the twelve olympians and is the messenger of the gods.
hermes is the son of zeus and maia.
he was born on mount cyllene.
hermes was very clever and on his first day invented the lyre, by using the shell of a tortoise.
she is also the most beautiful and the shyest.
she gave birth to hermes in a cave in arcadia.
in order to do this towns formed what are called communes.
obviously if a commune member was attacked outside the city it was too late to call for help as it would be unlikely anyone would be around in time.
this was often the case and certainly the town commune could not muster the forces to attack a castle.
it was eye for eye violent revenge.
some large or powerful countries control other regions to create a bigger empire.
heresy is a word used by different churches, it is used to describe someone, who has ideas that are different or the opposite from what the church officially says about what they believe in.
such a person is known as "heretic".
especially in the middle ages it was common to accuse someone of heresy.
they are famous for their sense of being free.
no one knows how many people use sign language, but some people think that between 500,000 and 2 million people in the u.s.a.
names of people and names of places can be fingerspelled.
most different countries have their own sign language.
it has red-brown hair on its body and a line of hair down its back which is different from the rest of hair on its body.
there are many different kinds of gloves.
people wear thick gloves, usually made of wool or fabric, to keep their hands warm in cold weather.
will is expected to have great powers of his own, but he finds that he doesn't have any.
he manages to defeat warren and both are put in a time out room where their powers do not work.
will soon falls for gwen and doesn't keep up with the friends he made as a sidekick.
will has an old friend named layla, whose power is to grow plants.
he was going to go to the prom with gwen, but now decides to stay home.
his parents go to the prom instead.
there was going to be a ceremony to honor the best superhero of all time.
the years passed and she grew into another teenager.
will comes on down to the school.
he is very sorry for how he acted as a hero and tells his sidekick friends that he needs all of their help to beat royal pain.
she has loaded all the babies onto the bus and will retrain them to be bad people.
he tells her to put his father down.
all seems lost when will appears in the window – he too has josie's power of flying.
the school begins to fall down.
will goes outside and uses his power to try to keep the school from hitting the ground.
two groups of people want her to stop.
they go to a different world called tethe'alla.
the spirits are are magical creatures.
some people saw a need to change the way the catholic church worked.
in the middle of the service the pastor will go in front of the whole congregation or stand in a pulpit and talk about jesus christ and eternal life.
he will encourage them to be obedient to god and have faith in god's son, and tell them to love one another.
sand can be mixed with water to make concrete, a tough material which can be used to build buildings.
it can also be used to make bricks or sand castles.when mixed with water sand will become mud.
it was in what is now turkey.
a towel is a form of cloth or paper used for drying things.
they began in 1967, and have been a strong team for most of their history.
sometimes it goes to someone on the losing team.
but the team did not win in 1968.
they had some trouble in the 1970s.
it is on the north bank of the menominee river where the river empties into lake michigan.
dog day afternoon
they wanted to understand the foundations of mathematics.
he thought that some people would come and poison him in his food.
we cannot say if it is true or false.
it had a very strong jaw, and its bite power could snap the bones of other dinosaurs.
he gave his opinion on many topics.
there are many reasons why people use masks.
it is about five thousand years old.
sometimes on holidays people do not have to go to school or the office.
this brought lots of people and money to spokane.
this waterfall is important to the city because it was where the first building in spokane was built, and it is very pretty.
the river is also important because many dams have been built on it so the city can have electricity.
before he had to go to court, he killed himself by using drugs.
the news channel is used to look up news about various subjects.
it also comes with a cover called the wii remote jacket, which protects the wii from being damaged, or broken which is very useful for those out there who are not careful with expensive things and those who find the straps uncomfortable.
it also provides a stronger grip.
a martyr is a person who died or was killed because of their religious beliefs.
it is also used for people who die for any belief or idea, that is not religious.
there are many places in the world of "earthbound".
appears and does battle with them.
the story is about a young girl named sakura who saves the world.
it sits at the mouth of the river wear.
in the 1300s people began to build ships along the river bank.
by 1835 the port of sunderland was so important that its name was used when the three old villages became the a borough.
this was the start of glass making in britain.
this is why the area is still called bishopwearmouth..
the merchant thomas menville started building ships so he could transport the things he wanted to sell.
this is known as salt panning.
it on the river bank near the city centre.
when an army from scotland came to fight the king it was based in sunderland.
many were frightened to say that a disease has started because it might stop their businesses from making money.
they printed notices which said there was no disease in the town, and saying that the doctors who said that there was disease did not know what they were talking about.
this meant it never had the problem of allowing people to cross the river without stopping high masted vessels.
at the bottom of the staircase the door only opened inward and was bolted so that only one child at a time could get through.
those at the front were trapped, and were crushed by the weight of the crowd behind them.
this law still remains in full force to this day.
but some fine old buildings remain.
sunderland is divided by the river wear which passes through the middle of the city in a deep valley, part of which is known as the hylton gorge.
, ships were built on the wear from at least 1346 onwards.
most people in the rich nations have most of these needs, but there are still many people living in poverty and in poor quality homes.
it is what they do to get money or a living.
people often have to learn a lot to help them do their job.
other people are then able to react faster to take protection measures.
the health of many people is put in danger.
some groups of people which are at risk may need special countermeasures.
during this time, he murdered many innocent people that he did not like.
the country area lies between two rivers; for this reason the area was called mesopotamia in ancient ages.
the united nations later allowed iraq to sell some oil to buy food, clothes, and medicine so the people would not suffer as much.
adam and eve
adam and eve is a story from the torah.
they lived in the garden of eden, but were made to leave because they ate the forbidden fruit, which god told them not to eat.
god punished eve because she had been tricked by the serpent.
god also punished adam for eating the fruit and said that man will always struggle to extract a living from the soil, and would return at death to the soil from where he came from.
is it possible that this story has taken this new shape in 3000 years?
it begins when muslims can find the moon for the first time after a few nights.
they can only do that once the sun goes down.
his exact date of birth is not known, but he knew it was in late may by the weather and the crops.
two of the attempts were stopped by bad weather which caused them to turn around.
they came back down from the top of the mountain on may 29, 1953.
they often help guide people through the mountains.
more people started living in the area and in 1768 it became a town named charlotte town.
it was named after the wife of king george iii because the people wanted him to like them.
but he did not, and soon he started passing laws that the people in charlotte did not like.
they did not want to be ruled by the king anymore so eleven days later they had a meeting and made new laws for their town.
a lot of gold was found.
more gold was found in north carolina then any other state until the california gold rush of 1848.
even more people started living in charlotte during world war i. when the war ended a lot of people stayed in the city.
it does not snow much in charlotte.
this means that there two main leaders in charlotte: the city council who makes the laws, and the city manager who makes sure everybody follows the laws.
right now there are about 22,000 students who go to this university.
there are many public busses to help people get around the city.
it means the time before people made writing.
a very small amount is known about pre-history because it was not written down by the people who lived then.
pre-history ends at different times in different places when people make writing.
they made fire from stones and they used fire to cook food and to keep warm.
they made clothes out of animal skins that they used to keep warm.
early middle ages
this made the people in europe unable to talk to each other and share news and facts.
because the roman army had kept peace between different parts of europe and defended it from other people, and the roman army had now collapsed, there was much fighting.
this time was known as the dark ages.
a famous person in the dark ages was king arthur of england.
we do not know if he was real or just a myth.
people know copernicus for his ideas about the sun and the earth.
he studied also medicine to serve his fellow clerics.
around 2000 people are struck by lightning each year.
it is home to more than fourteen thousand people.
an event is something that takes place.
it could also mean an important happening or activity.
different events are important for different people.
people think about their lives like they are made up of different pieces, and they separate the pieces by events they think are important.
wooden buildings such as houses are usually painted because a coat of paint prevents water seeping into the wood and making it rot.
since pre-historic times, people have painted the inside walls of their houses to make them look attractive.
he was an important supporter of julius caesar as a military commander and administrator.
they can be found down to about 200 m.
in england they are often used as the fish in fish and chips.
people usually will not talk about taboos.
doing something that is known as a taboo is usually seen as a bad thing by the community or society.
certain actions that are thought of as taboo are against the law in certain countries.
there are several different kinds of flatfish.
if it is divided by two the result is another whole number.
you can tell if a decimal number is an even number if the last digit is an even number.
those who suffer from it tend to fall asleep during the daytime, even if they do not want to.
this usually happens when people are very tired, and have not slept for a long time.
it is not yet known what causes narcolepsy.
this may point to the fact that some of the things that cause the disease may be passed from the parents to the children through genes.
ghost wail: danny can make a very loud yell, sending green sound waves out of his mouth which
destroy almost anything in his path.
he is smart and carries around gadgets.
although a little bit dumb sometimes, he really does care about his family.
he too also has ghost powers, but he is more powerful than danny.
guys in white - this is a small group in the show.
many people think he is very religious.
it is used by someone to help support themself when they are walking.
many more countries send athletes to the summer olympics than to the winter olympics.
there were 200 athletes from greece and 45 athletes from 13 other countries.
to the naked eye, the two brightest parts of the system are too close for the eye to be able to see them as separate stars.
both of the two main stars are rather similar to the sun.
last call bell
the last call bell is a bell found in bars.
slur is to talk very fast and mix words together in doing so.
usually people that are unable to completely care for themselves.
when a caregiver is assigned to look after a baby or a child they are called a babysitter.
if it is divided by two the result is a fraction.
if an even number is divided by two, the result is another whole number.
a small house is often called a cottage.
they are nearly always built from material that can be found nearby.
sometimes people may also get it before they fall asleep.
a finger is a body part that sticks out from the hand.
the first nation that used bronze was egypt about 3500 years b.c.
this gave the name for the bronze age.
flight, or flying, is to stay off of the ground for a period of time, or able to move through the air with wings.
humans consider birds to be the most free of any animal, because they can fly with their wings.
the fur is dark in summer and becomes a lighter color in winter.
after a pregnancy of 230 days the female gives birth to a single baby, usually in may or june.
they are also called true deer.
deer do not make nests or dens.
they find a safe and comfortable place to rest under low hanging evergreen branches.
they stay close to where they can find food.
they are hard to see because they often have spots on their backs.
they can usually run faster than their enemies.
it is a statue of king david from the bible, when he was about to throw a stone at goliath.
it is made of marble and is 17 feet tall.
when it was finished the statue was placed in front of the entrance to the palazzo vecchio.
it is of a roman goddess who was called venus.
the painting is set in the garden of venus, who is in the middle of the painting.
he is wearing a helmet and is carrying a sword.
on the left of the picture is zephyr.
he fired golden arrows at people to make them fall in love, and lead arrows to make people fall out of love.
the creation of adam
the act of developing of the fighting systems dates from when the man had been able to cause to pass the knowledge, along with the strategies of war.
his father was a banker and his mother came from a family who owned a lot of factories in berlin.
the young felix was educated at home by his parents.
although the family was jewish his parents had felix baptized and his father became a christian a few years later.
it was to be the first of several visits and goethe’s way of thinking and his works of german literature had a big influence on the young mendelssohn.
many rich and famous people were invited to their private concerts.
in italy he met berlioz and on his way back he met chopin.
in frankfurt am main he stayed with a family who had two daughters.
they had a happy marriage and had five children.
this was one of the highest musical jobs in germany.
he had already written some of this music 17 years earlier but now he finished it and performed it in 1843.
his body was taken by a special train to berlin where he was buried near the grave of his sister fanny.
people can ask the expert system a question.
the expert system will then use a set of rules and give answers to the question.
different groups of people can have different kinds of access to an expert system.
there is an expert system there, that can help to decide if there is a problem with the computer network.
the expert system will then ask some questions of her.
she might also be asked if the printer is turned on, and if there is enough paper.
there is never enough expertise to go around -- certainly it is not always available at the right place and the right time.
it also says how to end the communication.
it received city rights in 1865.
for a long period of time the city was ruled by germans, as it was a part of germany until 1918.
the hand-off is done so well and carefully that the user will usually never even know that the call was transferred to another cell.
they also needed so much power that you had to have them in an automobile to use them.
the waves are sent through antennas.
sometimes you can change the network by using a sim from another network, but some companies do not want this to happen and they lock the phone so that you have to use their sim.
older phones were not very good at this as they were very slow.
artemis is a goddess in greek mythology, and one of the twelve olympians.
she is the daughter of zeus and leto and the twin sister of apollo.
she is also known as the goddess who asked zeus to remain chaste and unmarried.
in greek mythology, artemis is the daughter of zeus and leto, and the twin sister of apollo.
leto had to find a place where the sun had never shone to give birth to the two.
he is the son of zeus and leto and the twin brother of artemis.
he was the god of healing and medicine, and of music and poetry.
he was the leader of the muses.
he and his brothers and sister were the friends of zeus and were always with him.
he was best known for work with his siblings in the marx brothers and then later on his own.
the gods and goddesses in these stories have lots of magic powers.
they can make themselves invisible to humans and move to any place in a very short amount of time.
the gods and goddesses also never get sick and can only be hurt by very unusual causes.
list of greek gods and goddesses
this is a list of the gods and goddesses of greek mythology.
the roman names are often better known to english-speaking people than the greek names.
it was thought that each god ruled a certain part of the environment and human life.
these gods are the most important and powerful gods.
the home of these gods was mount olympus.
the stars themselves were said to be formed from the concentrated fires of aither.
geras is the god of age in greek mythology.
she was the mother of athena.
there is also a moon named after metis.
she opens the gates of heaven so that helios can ride his chariot across the sky each day.
she later became one with the goddess artemis.
she is sometimes riding a silver chariot pulled by oxen or a pair of horses.
it was based on a book written in 1970 by james dickey, who also wrote the screenplay and had a small part in the movie.
he is the son of zeus and hera.
he is one of the twelve olympians.
in voodoo many gods and spirits are prayed to or called on.
both spirits of nature and of dead people are important.
the spirits of family member who have died are especially important.
this spirit can speak for the gods or dead people you love, and can also help to heal or do magic.
some people think they are not the same religion because voodoo has changed some after it was taken from africa.
the word voodoo is often used to mean any kind of magic.
though this is not accurate, the song may be better known than the real woman.
once he tried to stop his fighting parents.
in order to punish humans for stealing the knowledge of how to make fire, jupiter ordered to make pandora as a bad gift for man.
vulcan's part in making pandora was to make her out of clay and give her human form.
he also made thrones for the other gods to sit on in mount etna.
he even made slave-girls of gold to wait on him and do his bidding.
he also made the thrones for the other gods on mount olympus.
during the festival fish and small animals are thrown into the fire.
she is the daughter of hermes and aphrodite.
she is one of the twelve olympians.
she is the mother of persephone.
the gods and goddesses in these stories have lots of magic powers.
they can make themselves invisible to humans and move to any place in a very short amount of time.
the gods and goddesses also never get sick and can only be hurt by very unusual causes.
list of roman gods and goddesses
this is a list of roman gods and goddesses that are in roman mythology.
list of names of mythological gods
ancient history is history from when human history began until the early middle ages or the end of the roman empire in about 476 ad.
finding facts about ancient history is difficult because people wrote less in those times and some of what they did write has been lost.
not many people could read and write in ancient history so people did not write about history then.
there were very small numbers of copies made because there was no printing press.
what people wrote they wrote by hand.
more people could read and write in ancient rome than in other places but much of what they wrote is now lost.
historians look at things that were made and used in ancient history to learn more about it.
archaeology is looking at things that were made or used in the past to find out more about that time.
but people in ancient history may have believed different things from each other.
but in some cities it is a sub-division of the city (e.g.
she put a curse on her that meant that she could only speak the last words of other people after she had heard them.
it is due to this story that we get the meaning behind the word "echo".
however, narcissus had no heart and could not fall in love with anybody.
echo could not speak to narcissus but wanted to be able to see him.
echo did so and then told narcissus that she loved him by hand movements.
echo's voice was not collected, so it remains all over the world and still says the last words that other people have said.
he later became one with the god apollo.
she and her brothers and sister were the friends of zeus and were always with him.
he and her brothers and sister were the friends of zeus and were always with him.
with zeus her children are the nine muses.
thurmond spent more than 70 year of his life on public career.
today it has lost this meaning.
these playwrights are important as they wrote in a way that is still used by modern playwrights.
a lot of later work is based on his tragedies and comedies.
because of that he put his daughter danaë in a tower where no one was allowed to enter, so she could not have a child.
but the god zeus could enter in the form of a golden rain, and with him her child was perseus.
there they are found by diktys, who lets them live with him.
he is believed to be one of the best violinists who ever lived.
he was said to be a show off during his time and many wanted to challenge his violin skills.
in developed areas it is often said to be a weed because it grows well in lawns.
under the rainbow
it is usually meant as an insult.
whoever has the best hand wins all the money put in the middle during betting.
he was born in alabama, but was raised and is still living in florida.
he served both in us army and us air force.
after the berlin wall was opened the trabant did not sell as much as before, because the people wanted bigger cars that they could get after the wall was opened.
brok is regarded by many as one of the most beautiful places in this part of poland.
they can be written two next to each other.
right now he is playing in france as a pro for c.a.
he did much to protect the environment.
this meant that they walked around from place to place and did not make cities.
they lived in separate tribes and each tribe had its own language and traditions.
they also thought that families were very important.
they had a strong religion and they believed that everything had come from the dreamtime and that the earth was sacred.
they believed that spirits such as the rainbow serpent had made the world.
the religion was passed on from parents to children and their culture is famous for its oral history.
dreamtime was all four of these things at the same time because it is more powerful than time and space.
in it all things exist at once.
the aborigines believe that people have a part of them that will live forever.
this part existed before a person was born and will exist after they die.
each tribe has stories that say things about it.
most aborigines believe that all life is connected to the great spirit ancestors of the dreamtime.
it is one of only seven years to use just one roman numeral.
it has its own government, but it is an associated state of new zealand.
the nazis made laws that were based on their ideas of race.
it is a picture of the last supper of jesus and his disciples and shows how they reacted when jesus said that one of them would betray him, each disciple has their own expression showing their own reaction to what jesus had just told them.
thomas the apostle
he is most famous for not being present when the other apostles (jesus's followers and friends) first saw jesus after he has been risen from the dead.
thomas was not there and when he heard about it, he didn't believe his friends, and he said he wanted to see it for himself, even the marks in his hands where jesus had been nailed to the cross.
jesus did return and showed thomas.
bartholomew the apostle
bartholomew the apostle is one of the twelve apostles of jesus.
john the apostle
saint john was one of the twelve apostles of jesus who is believed to have written the one of the four gospels of the new testament of the christian bible that is named after him.
he is often talked about in the bible.
most of what we know about peter comes from the bible.
it is not known when peter was born.
he died by being nailed to a cross in rome.
others say he died right side up.
the name of his wife is unknown nor is it known if he lived with her once he started his ministry.
the bible tells us that peter was responsible for letting people who were not jews become christians.
the lower parts of the walls are painted to look like gold and silver cloth.
on the north side, the stories are about the life of moses.
the ceiling is the most famous part of the sistine chapel, and many thousands of visitors go to see it.
he did not want to be a painter.
he reaches out his hand and touches his finger to give him life.
in the third picture there are two scenes.
adam and eve are tricked by the devil to eat fruit from the tree that they have been told not to touch.
this story tells how sin came into the world.
they tell about a sad and sinful world.
only noah and his family escape in the large boat that they build.
when the flood has ended, they make an altar and kill a sheep as a sacrifice to god.
one of his sons sees noah lying naked and laughs at his father.
noah is ashamed and curses his son.
these stories show how people keep acting the wrong way, even when they get a second chance.
these were the prophets and sibyls who told people that god would send jesus christ to save them from sin.
also painted on the ceiling are 20 beautiful young men called the "ignudi".
this time it was on the wall above the altar.
michelangelo painted "the last judgement" which shows jesus judging the people of the earth and sending some to hell while others are welcomed into heaven by saints.
this made some of the priests in the church very angry.
they paid another artist to paint clothes onto the blessed virgin mary and many of the other figures.
they are also known as pe.
after he kills duncan, macbeth becomes king and tries to kill everyone who might want to take the throne away from him.
the men find that they are in love with the ladies and cannot hide it.
but because he was famous, perugino also got lots of work from wealthy patrons and from churches, so he painted many very large pieces to go above the altar in church.
he added to this new ideas that he learnt by looking at the work of other artists.
in his dream there are two beautiful women.
he spent the last 12 years of his life in rome and created many of his most famous paintings.
of course raphael wanted to see what the famous master was doing.
the painting is meant to show that at that time, the early 1500s, there was a new birth of ideas and learning among the people of rome that was equal to the learning of ancient athens.
a conservation law is a statement used in physics that says that the amount of something does not change in time.
this is because if they know that a thing is conserved, it gives them more mathematical information about the thing they are doing the problem about.
it says that if the amount of something changed in one place, it's because it moved in to or out of that place, and we can measure that movement.
there are many reasons for keeping secrets.
some things will only be kept secret until a certain time.
other things may be kept secret forever.
sometimes things might be kept secret from someone because it is believed that it would upset them to know.
no one else should know it.
things that are talked about at meetings are sometimes confidential.
people who were at the meeting should not go telling everyone else what was discussed.
the stadium was built in 1914 and has been the home playing field of the cubs since 1916.
those who follow this way of looking at the world say that everyone has some parts of both traits in them, though one will usually dominate over the other.
one of the first people to live in this young town was joseph b. sartell.
both of these things were finished in 1907.
seven people died when building the dam.
the city has also built places for people to have fun.
they own a paper mill in the city.
many of her songs have reached high ranks and are still popular.
he is most famous for his dance songs.
for a time it seemed that he would become a concert pianist, but he did not do well enough in his examination.
it is one of the most exciting pieces of music about the sea.
it is a wonderful piece of music, but many people at the time did not understand it.
saint-saëns, for example, did not understand the way that the musical ideas flowed gently into one another.
he was always an enemy of debussy.
he wrote two books of preludes.
each of the pieces has a title, but the titles are printed at the end of each piece, as if he did not want the listener to know what it was about until afterwards.
this can be heard in his songs and his opera.
he also used the old scales known as the church modes.
it was not finished when he died.
the first person we meet is called john jasper.
he has to get married to her because his parents and rosa’s parents said they had to.
at the same time, jasper wants to learn about the graveyard, so he goes to find a man called durdles, who knows a lot about the graveyard.
they are both sent to a school in cloisterham.
she says she finds him scary.
this money is from her father who is dead.
she asks him if they money will still be given to her if she doesn’t marry edwin.
there is another man watching to make sure mr.
jasper is interested in this trick.
suddenly they see a boy called deputy.
jasper thinks the boy was following them, so he holds him by the neck.
he wants to do some walking in his spare time in the countryside.
she says that she is happy his name is not ned.
he says that he will bring neville forward whenever he is needed.
he lives near jasper and watches him.
he tells her that he loves her.
tartar meets him and asks him if he knows who he is.
he has not been there for a long time.
the woman who owns the place follows him.
she promises not to lose him again like last time.
she follows him all the way to cloisterham.
he also says that he is going to sing in the church service in the morning.
no one knows what happens next.
it is a feature that makes many religious and government buildings stand out, because if someone is speaking to others inside or under a dome, the voice sounds louder.
people lived there since roman times.
the story takes place in the caribbean.
this law does not exist anywhere else in the world.
there were more than 60 people in the cafe.
two minutes later he went back to his car to get more guns.
he finally gave himself up to the police after 18 hours.
he was burned in the fire.
the court said he was never to be released.
the ruins of the cafe are now a memorial to the people who were killed in the massacre.
a square pond has been built as a place for quiet thinking.
this was to remember 10 years since the massacre.
some of these people were visiting australia.
some of these people were visiting sydney from other parts of australia.
some of these people were from sydney.
some of these people were by themselves.
some of these people were with a friend.
the 7 people were all different from each other.
someone had sex with some of them.
some of them had their clothes taken off.
some of them were wearing clothes that belonged to other ones.
some of them had bits of their bodies cut off and put somewhere else.
some of the bodies were by themselves.
some of the people had been killed with a shovel.
some had been killed with an axe.
some had been killed with a gun.
the 7 people who died had nothing in common.
people who tried to find out who did it said that it must have been 7 different people who killed them.
a man named chopper read said that he knew who killed the people in the "backpacker murders".
police have said that there are more than 30 people that went missing that might have been killed by ivan milat.
but police said that the woman was lying and they did not want to check.
a dna check would have made police open the case again to find out what really happened.
police say that he is dead.
many people say they saw falconio over a week after police say that he died.
he had told people that he thought he was being followed and was going to get rid of them.
this remains a great mystery and many people have different stories as to what really happened.
the movie was not allowed to be shown until after the trial.
some people said this was because many people did not have jobs.
he is never to be released.
guards and doctors report that his only interest seems to be himself.
he has tried to kill himself several times in prison.
he has been in many movies.
more recently he has begun making music.
during this time he was the leader of a gang.
while in prison as an adult read made a friend cut off his ears so he could leave prison where a gang wanted to have him killed.
read claims that he killed 19 people during his time as a criminal.
his first book was written in 1991 while he was in prison.
most have to do with grammar.
some people think it is cool and they try to speak it or learn it even if they are not really familiar with it.
he is most famous for writing many stories on the internet about famous things that have happened around the world.
some people think that he is not really dead.
the many uses of the word are listed below.
the chest is the front part of the torso between the neck and abdomen.
this means that they listen to what people are saying in other countries, without letting the people know that they are listening.
the nsa is also in charge of making sure that other countries do not eavesdrop on the united states.
many people have written books about the nsa.
he was 6 feet tall by the time he entered 3rd grade.
because he was so tall, he got lots of attention and became very famous, but his bones were very weak and he had to wear leg braces.
they think it is fun to make codes, and fun to break codes.
breaking a code means taking it apart to understand how it works, and then you can understand messages that are written in that code.
it is supposed to be written and used by scientists, not by normal people.
the people who write wikispecies do not need to show that they know much about it.
there is information in the article telling people what the article's living thing is called in every other language that has a common name for it.
it was to be a group of nations that worked together to keep peace.
this meant the league did not have the power it needed to enforce any of the rules that made it up.
the idea of his plan was to settle problems between the nations.
they also felt that it would result in them spending more money on unnecessary objects such as sending men all around the globe.
the students get a reward for speaking correctly.
they get punishment if they speak incorrectly.
it had also been independent before world war i and existed as a kingdom.
this can only happen during a new moon, and usually happens at least once every year.
she was a very famous model for a long time.
paul and minneapolis are called the twin cities because they are right next to each other.
they named the new city minneapolis.
the city is also in the middle of the country.
some now live in tall buildings called condos.
they work and play in the city.
soon people from almost all parts of the world started coming including east europe, russia, and asia.
he has since appeared in many other movies and there have been rumors that he would return as pee-wee.
it is also important for bearing some load.
some of it is on the internet.
the reason to use this is to replace the use of petroleum.
this is bad for the ecology.
the name comes from the fact that the brachiosaurus's front legs were longer than its back legs.
most other dinosaurs had back legs that were longer than their front legs or arms.
the separate system was a change in the way that prisoners were treated.
it did not turn bad people into good people.
they were not allowed to talk or make any noise.
even in the chapel, each prisoner was kept in a separate wooden box where they could only see the altar.
the prisoners were supposed to use the quiet time to think about the bad things they had done.
it is joined to the rest of tasmania by a small narrow piece of land about 30 metres wide.
ships had to give the guards their sails and oars when they arrived to stop people leaving without permission.
some prisoners did try to escape.
the hungry guards on duty tried to shoot him to make an extra meal.
like the adults, the boys were given hard work such as stone cutting and building.
there was also a school run by 2 ex-convicts.. one prisoner was james gavagan.
when he was 11 he stole some umbrellas.
all prisoners had to go to the church every sunday.
people who didn't like the new prison system said that this didn't seem to make the prisoners into good people.
some stories say that prisoners would murder others to escape the prison.
murder would be punished by death.
the island of the dead is a small island in the bay near port arthur.
everyone who died at the penal colony was buried on the island.
it carried both people and supplies.
during the 1880s the was sold and a small town was started.
many buildings were pulled down and the bricks sent to make new buildings in hobart.
this brought money into the new town.
the buildings are surrounded by green grass.
the mass graves on the island of the dead also attract visitors.
he was captured by the police.
he was the king of the island ithaca, and was married to penelope.
white cast iron has less silicon.
this causes it to have a dark grey or almost black color.
incest between adults and children is a form of child sexual abuse.
this is a very important book because it is one of the first to be written in the english language.
two of the stories are written in prose and the others are written in verse.
they were so popular that he was invited to read his stories to the king and royal court.
the king felt very sad and guilty.
people began to visit the tomb.
this was a good place to meet because people from the north could cross the thames river by london bridge.
a reason why pilgrims used to gather in groups was that it was dangerous to travel alone.
robbers often attacked people along the roads.
he says that it is at this time that people begin to go on pilgrimage.
chaucer tells the reader about the people who are gathered at the inn.
chaucer planned the stories before he wrote them but he did not finish his plan.
he stopped writing them in the 1390s.
some think that he deliberately did not write the total 120 stories.
some people think that chaucer based his characters on people that he really knew and who were at the royal court.
they all tell different types of stories and they tell them in different ways.
they are riding horses and the trip takes several days.
chaucer does not say much about the big story and most of the writing is about the stories told by the pilgrims.
sweat comes out when the body is hot because it helps cool it down.
some people think sweat makes a person smell bad.
because some famous people use the clothes, other people want to buy them too.
if the mother and baby blood mixes, it could be deadly for both the mother and the baby.
if the mother is blood type a for example and the blood type of the baby is b, then different type blood will mix and the mother and baby would both die.
this is because it sometimes acts like a particle and sometimes acts like a wave.
it is 21 miles away from boston.
in humans, the bones of each toe continue all the way to the heel, although in from the base of the toes they come together in the body of the foot.
the one on the other end is short and thin.
if a body is at rest it remains at rest or if it is in motion it moves with uniform velocity until it is acted on by a resultant force.
in other words, the first law says that an object that is not moving or moving in a constant speed in a straight line, will stay like that until something pushes it or blocks its path.
as we all know, nothing in the visual world ever stays in constant speed, but the object itself is moving at constant speed, while a force is stopping it from moving at constant speed, friction.
however, in space, an object can move in a constant speed as long as it does not get close to any other objects, and stays in open space.
the idea of inertia can be seen and felt in every day life.
this example also shows how the third law always involves two different bodies (in this case, the person and the sled).
you may be wanting to read about a fence."
women must wear a chest protector.
he or she can even ban someone if they are putting bad things on the internet.
international law is the law that is use when countries deal with each other.
it is in the west of the country, in the province south holland.
these are the same as the upper and lower houses in some other countries.
special air service
the sas is a very secret organisation, its members often do not tell anyone except close family that they are in it.
it is based on the idea that everyone pays the same amount of tax.
it has been used since 1858.
it is made up of 8 groups with 4 clubs in each group.
they play three home games and three away games.
the top 2 clubs in every group advance to the next round.
a total of 16 clubs play in the playoffs.
it is much longer than most other bows and is much more powerful.
there are just two things people can do there.
the first thing is this: a person can ask the other people for an item.
if someone has it, they can tell the person who wants it.
the second thing is this: a person can give away an item.
it has lots of things to talk about.
anyone can go to slashdot and read it and do not need to give money.
it has many ideas which are never the same.
there is a negative sign because the force of the spring does not go to the same direction as the spring moves.
a linear spring can only be pushed or pulled in one direction.
they also like to watch trains.
this book took place during the gold rush.
he also wrote other books about dogs and wolves.
he also spent some time at sea and making a living as an "oyster pirate".
he wrote many books about sailing and boats.
one of his best known books about life at sea was "the sea wolf".
it is 50 miles north of london.
on the other hand it is said that the book just shows how life and society were at that time, and that at that time slavery was thought to be normal and right.
it is played on a large (12' × 6') table that is covered with baize and has pockets in each of the four corners and in the middle of each of the long side cushions.
in other words, if you find a predicate that has a different truth value when it is applied to either x or y, then the two cannot be equal.
here is a simple way of saying that: if two things are equal, anything that is true about one of them has to be true about the other one.
in social sciences, two people are equal if many of the same things are true about them.
two people who have the same amount of education and money and are the same age usually think of each other as equals.
another name for a person who is equal to another person is a peer.
they are different from each other because different types of decay produce different particles.
it is one of the main reasons people are addicted to smoking.
addiction is when the body or mind badly wants or needs something in order to work right.
but taking more of the thing they are addicted to can also hurt their health.
people can also be addicted to other things which are not drugs.
secession usually means when part of one country breaks away, or leaves that country to start a new country.
new england is a part in the north of the united states.
this may or may not be permanent.
people who have problems taking tests will also have problems taking an iq test.
there is another problem with testing this way.
highest is 200 and lowest is 50
then they find out that the ship has been to another dimension and it is like hell and everyone sees their worst nightmares.
sam neill sees his wife in his dream, and she tells him to pull his eyes out.
sam neill then walks around without any eyes and starts to kill people.
stalking is following someone around in a way that makes them feel hunted or not safe in some other way.
someone who does this is called a stalker.
the stalker may do this because they want to be involved in that person's life or because they want to have power over that person's life.
they may feel they do not have the power to stop the stalker.
then they might use this information to do more stalking or find other ways to hurt that person on the internet or hurt their body.
or they may feel they have less power if they do not know who the stalker is.
then it uses the idea that the change in direction and the voltage are proportional to find the voltage.
for example, to learn how soon a car can reach 60 miles per hour, or how much time it takes a runner to run 40 yards.
since now it is only used in shanghai.
there has been plans to bring it back.
this force is carried by pions.
they are the particles that join together to make up everything we see.
fermions are special because you cannot put two of them in the same place at the same time.
this is different from photons, where you can have many in the same place at the same time.
concerts were expensive in those days, and not many people had enough money to go and hear good music.
most people were only able to hear good music when they went for walks in the london parks where there were promenade concerts.
people could enjoy the music while they walked about.
the idea was that people could have standing places which would not cost much money.
there would also be seats for people who could afford to pay more.
the early years of the proms.
people got used to listening to this music and slowly their musical tastes became better so that they could listen to longer pieces of music.
he did not know any of them!
at first people said “if you put concerts on the wireless, people will just sit at home to listen to music and no one will bother to go to concerts any more”.
but the people who said that were wrong.
hearing music on the radio made people more interested in going to concerts.
they have been held there ever since.
the television programme blue peter put on a blue peter prom which is given twice during the weekend at the beginning of the school holidays in late july.
in the 2007 season they organized a special brass day where children can take part with their instruments.
the last night of the proms.
there is a prom every night (i.e.
it is very famous and millions of people can watch it on television in lots of countries all over the world.
how to go to the proms.
but many people think the best way to go to the proms is to be a promenader.
this means having a standing place.
that is why the floor downstairs is called the “arena”, like in an amphitheatre.
but it can be quite a squash when there are lots of people, and small children need to be near the front to see properly.
there is more room there, and it is easy to see, and easy to sit down or even lie down when one feels tired.
they pass the time by talking to one another, reading or playing games.
it is all good fun and part of enjoying being at the proms.
many people have died during its eruptions.
this means that they make it very hard for electricity to flow through them.
the gods must be crazy
if two, three or four people play music together they can talk about this amongst themselves and one person can nod with his/her head or with a violin bow or flute to help the group to start and finish together.
with an orchestra there are so many people that they need a conductor.
but as orchestras grew in size it became more and more necessary to have someone in front to lead.
one day he banged his stick very hard and it went through his foot and he became ill and died.
he dressed in expensive clothes and his long black hair waved all over the place as he conducted.
this leaves their left hand free to show the various instruments when they have entries (when they start playing) or to show them to play louder or softer.
it makes it easier for people at the back of large orchestras or choirs to see the beat.
a good conductor has to know the music extremely well so that they can hear any wrong notes.
they need to be able to imagine exactly the sound they want the orchestra to make.
they make everything clear through the way they conduct.
it is spoken by over four and a half million people, and belongs to the group of north germanic languages which are spoken in scandinavia.
this is because many vikings sailed from norway to iceland in order to escape from the rule of the norwegian kings who were making people pay lots of tax.
today about one person in nine or ten in norway writes nynorsk.
children in school have to learn both forms.
it is known as the city of peace.
a group of people living close together in a small community is called a neighborhood.
he was born in tokyo and in the forest he liked collecting insects.
he was pushed away as a child and when he grew up he named a book game freaks.
one of these walks includes a big rock and a little rock called the cow and calf rocks.
by these rocks there is a pub called "the cow and calf".
these models then can be used to predict what will happen in the real world.
this picture might show that houses close to the market are worth more.
an economist could then say that if a new market is made in another part of the town, home prices there might go up.
the economist also might say that the new market could make prices less than before near the old one, because the new market will make it so that more houses are near a market.
this would make the people who sell houses near a market sell them for less, since there could be more sellers than buyers.
king of arms
some countries do not have a king of arms, but have another person that grants coats of arms.
a king of arms is also usually in charge of special ceremonies for a country.
an autobiography is a book in which the author writes about his or her own life.
the plants are kept small by skilled pruning.
people may also make them look old.
they can be as small as an ant or as large as a soft drink can.
when talking about the near future, people often use the word "tactics".
it is only the language used to describe them that has been made simpler.
another easy to understand pattern is called "singleton".
it is used when there can only be one instance of a given class.
a round in music is a song which can be sung by two or more groups of people.
one group starts off and the next group start to sing the same song a bit later.
when a group gets to the end of the song they start again.
when a group of people sing or play a round they usually sing it an agreed number of times.
this is a very famous piece of music because it is the oldest piece of music we know that was written down.
they can hear and smell very well, but they cannot see very well.
they live in trees, and they do not like to be on the ground.
young koalas usually leave their mothers when they are 18 months old, but when their mother does not have another baby they sometimes leave after up to 3 years.
koalas become mature when they are about 2 years old, but they often have their first baby after another two years.
but there are also places with too many koalas, so they eat too much.
because of this the eucalyptus trees and other animals are in danger.
the piece that made him famous was called "harmonium".
at times the music is made to sound like a harmonium instrument, but the title also refers to "harmony", showing that he is writing tonal music unlike some modern composers at the time whose music was getting harder and harder to understand because it was not in any key.
in music a cluster is a large group of notes on the piano usually played with the arm.
discrimination against is when a person is treated unfairly or badly because of something about that person.
even in those countries where discrimination is against the law, it still takes place for other reasons not covered by the law.
serialism is a way of composing music using a series of notes in a particular order and using this to build up a whole piece of music.
let us use just five notes from the white notes of a keyboard.
this means that instead of going up one step we go down one step, or instead of going up two steps we go down two steps etc.
instead of using just five notes as in our example, he used all 12 notes in the octave (5 black and 7 white notes on the piano keyboard).
most music we listen to is in a particular key (tonality).
this makes the music very hard to understand and it took people a long time to get used to the sound of schoenberg’s new music.
when all these things were used for the whole piece of music it was called “total serialism”.
a lot of people criticized this music, saying that it was too mathematical instead of being expressive.
such music is hard to understand.
some of his music for the piano is very difficult to play, but it is admired as some of the most poetic music ever written.
he was given private music lessons by several important musicians.
his music was praised in his lifetime.
his father was a rich landowner.
glinka was brought up by his grandmother who looked after him very carefully.
she was always afraid he would be cold, so she wrapped him up in a fur coat in a room which was kept at 77°f.
it was a long way to the big cities from where the child lived.
after his grandmother died he was allowed to travel 6 miles to his uncle’s home.
he had never heard such music before.
when he was 13 he went to school in st petersburg.
now he could hear lots of music and meet some good musicians.
he had piano lessons and spent a lot of time at parties.
he like their music, and decided he wanted to write opera as well, but he wanted to make his music sound very russian.
the man who wrote the words for him did it very quickly while he was drunk, so the story is a bit muddled, but the music is wonderful.
some of the music sounds quite oriental.
it has many caves along the coastline.
some birds actually live on the islands, but most are just using them as a stopover to fly elsewhere.
to some people it means the five wounds of jesus christ (the nails in each hand and foot, and the spear wound in his side).
they are nocturnal which means they sleep during the day and are awake during the night.
the devil is the same size as a small dog with a wide head and a short tail.
the devil has strong teeth and jaws and will eat all its prey even bones and fur.
devils used to have babies every year for 3 years, but they are now dying before they can produce a second litter.
mozart, who lived at the same time, wrote lots of letters to his family so we know a lot about what he did and thought.
the only letters of haydn that we still have were business letters, so we do not know much detail about how he lived.
his parents liked music and wanted their son to be musical, so they sent him to a boarding school several miles away when he was only six.
he does not seem to have been taught any music theory.
for the next ten years he did not have much money.
he lived in an attic room and gave music lessons to young pupils.
he also played in bands and orchestras.
in the winter the prince liked to be in his palace in vienna, but in the summer he liked to go to his new palace in the country in what is now hungary.
the reason was that one autumn the musicians were fed up with being in the country palace and wanted to go back to vienna.
haydn was playing a trick on the people in the audience who often fell asleep during the music.
the music is very quiet indeed, then suddenly there is a very loud chord!
this had a good side: he was free to travel whenever he wanted.
there he spent his last years writing religious works for chorus and orchestra.
when we have a row of notes which gradually go up or come down this is called a scale.
if we start on the note c and play each white note going up until we come to the next c we have played a scale.
each line starts on the next note of the scale.
orthology is the study of the right use of words in language.
it was a time of musical change.
this can be seen in the architecture of famous buildings such as st.
they were built at this time.
pattern language is used to mean a system of patterns that have a certain meaning other than just the pattern.
the most obvious form of sight-based pattern language comes in the form of writing.
it has also come to mean any art form which has become very famous and is remembered for centuries afterwards.
this is what causes stars to die.
the leader will be the highest paid member of the orchestra.
he has to decide how the violins will play the music and write in the bowing.
he will talk to the conductor about anything the orchestra are not happy about (he may have to remind the conductor when it is time to stop the rehearsal!).
the theory is that no state would start an attack if attacking its enemy means its own destruction.
it is supposed to be a long gone mythological time of our earth.
their name at that time was rosenblum.
all four boys were musical and so his parents decided to move to vienna which was a big city in austria where there was lots of music.
his father made good quality carriages and he made plenty of money from his business.
when he was ten he was good enough to study the violin at the vienna conservatorium which was a special school for musical pupils.
he stayed in that job for 50 years!
arnold was kept very busy at his job as leader of the orchestra.
at one special concert lots of flowers and plants had been brought in to the concert hall.
when he looked down at his feet he saw a mouse sitting there.
they had plenty of money to live quite comfortably.
he was given the title of royal and imperial court musician, and he had a special court carriage to take him to the opera.
in the autumn his wife died and arnold had to save his life by going to england.
it has been influenced by and has got many words from german and swedish.
this x is called a double helix.
if a person does not have the exact number of chromosomes, they could die or have one or more peculiarities.
he was very famous in his day and composed a lot of church music.
he also wrote some fine madrigals.
he lived at the end of the renaissance period and the beginning of the baroque.
he was also very famous as a player.
although he only lived until he was 36 he wrote a very large amount of music.
this was the best musical training a boy could have in england.
he was then given the job of looking after the king’s musical instruments.
he started writing music for the theatre.
one is called "they that go down to the sea in ships".
it goes down to a low d.
he continued to write music including odes to the king and royal family.
he was born one year before the time known in england as the “restoration”.
people were therefore very glad to be able to make music again, and they wanted lots of songs and instrumental music in their plays.
although purcell was recognized as a great composer at the time he did not have much influence on other composers after his death.
after his death english music was not as important as it had been.
many of his relatives were composers.
he is famous for his operas which were written in a new and exciting way.
he thought that people were expecting him to be the “next beethoven”, and spent many years on his first symphony before he allowed it to be performed.
he was to stay there for the rest of his life.
in the winter he gave concerts and in the summer he spent his time composing.
his father had died of the same illness.
in his last years he was very ill, but he still wanted to compose, so he dictated the music he heard in his head to a man called eric fenby.
when he was very small he showed great musical talent.
his mother taught him to play the piano.
this can be heard in the first of his six string quartets.
this started to make him famous abroad.
his political ideas gave him a great deal of trouble in hungary.
he was also not very well known in america, and not many people were interested in his music.
they did not have very much money, although he had some friends who gave them enough to live on.
he wrote a lot of piano music, including some easy pieces for people who are learning the piano.
britten started composing music at the age of five although he had no one to help him.
when he was ten years old he took part in an amateur music festival in norwich.
he realized that he could not work and be himself in a foreign country.
as soon as he was on the boat sailing back to england he started work on "ceremony of carols".
this piece shows off each instrument of the orchestra in turn so that young people can get to know the sound of the musical instruments.
in 1948 the group helped to start a music festival in aldeburgh.
this is one of the greatest musical works of the 20th century.
he wrote a lot of work for children.
there are even parts for children in some of his grand operas, e.g.
he also knew what it was like to be an outsider when he tried to live in the united states, and his refusal to fight in the war may have distanced him from some people.
he lived at a time of great change in musical style.
he wrote 9 books of madrigals.
he also wrote a lot of church music including the "1610 vespers".
he was very talented as a young boy and was only 15 when he published his first pieces of music.
we cannot find anything that shows that he sang in the cathedral choir.
by the time he got his first job he had already published two books of madrigals.
his first job was working at the court of the duke of mantua.
in this style of writing the music was thought to be more important than the words.
this meant that the music could be very contrapuntal, with several things going on at once so that the words could not be clearly heard.
it was important to be able to hear all the words clearly, and the music had to be simple enough for this to happen.
he had to compose music for many special feast days during the year.
perhaps it was because he was so busy, or perhaps because he no longer needed to look for fame.
he probably wrote a lot of church music which is now lost.
during the 1620s continued his work in venice, although he may have tried to get other jobs.
he was supposed to receive an annual salary from them, but he often did not get it.
there was a war in mantua, a lot of buildings were destroyed and the invading armies brought the plague.
it is not clear whether he did this because he really was religious or whether he thought it would help his career.
the fast water on the outside 'erodes' the outside of the bend.
this means it breaks bits of the bank off.
the bend moves farther and farther along until it leaves the river.
won the us open cup in 2007.
real salt lake
when he was small his famous father taught him to play the harpsichord and organ.
the first ones are very easy, but they soon become very hard.
this must mean that the young boy made very fast progress.
he was a very good improviser, but was careless when playing music by other composers, including his father's.
so a lot of great music has been lost to the world.
it has two different meanings at different times in history.
often fantasy also means that the story takes place in another world different from our own (e.g.
a materialist is someone who believes that the world around us is made of material, that there are no gods or other supernatural things.
there are a number of reasons that people build dams.
some people call her posh spice because she is from the spice girls.
by the time we come to the classical period sonatas have become longer pieces with three or four movements.
they would usually start with a fast movement, then a slow one, and then a fast one at the end.
listening to some pieces of music in sonata form will help to understand it fully.
this meant that there were two sections.
the two sections were often the same length, and were separated by a double bar line which meant that each section was repeated.
the music would not be in the same key all the time.
the story was being told in the recitative.
once the situation in the story had changed there would be an aria.
a lot of them certainly did like to show off.
others may have had more musical taste.
sometimes pieces for instruments are called “aria”.
as a boy he showed great talent and was sent to rome to study music.
he took the job, but had to promise only to work for the king, and no one else.
when the king died he found himself without a job, so he went back to madrid.
there he found work at times, but a lot of the time he was very poor.
he started playing the harpsichord and the organ when he was very young.
he was given a clavichord when he was seven and he used to practice it in the attic where his father could not hear him.
at the age of nine he was already composing.
the elector agreed that handel could have an immediate leave of 12 months so that he could go to london.
he was also trying to learn english.
he was having a lot of success, so he stayed in england instead of going back to his job in hanover.
a few years later his salary increased again when he taught music to queen caroline’s daughters.
it had nothing to do with the academy which is called the royal academy of music today where young students study music.
he sometimes travelled to italy to find new italian singers and persuade them to come to london.
he left £20,000 which was a lot of money for those days.
he always wrote the words himself.
he made his music tell the story by using what he called “leitmotifs”.
he studied at the university of leipzig, although he was not allowed to be a full student because he did not have proper school qualifications.
although he lived a wild life he worked hard at his music.
although he did not take part in the fighting he was going to be arrested, so franz liszt helped him to escape to switzerland.
it was something that would take him over 25 years to complete.
these operas can be seen as describing a new kind of world in which humans are free.
there were lots of new ideas in this opera, especially in the harmony.
it is different to his other operas because it is a comedy.
by 1864 wagner had spent so much money that he was in debt once more and he fled to stuttgart to avoid being put into prison (germany at that time was still made up of lots of small countries, each with their own laws).
there were plans for a new opera house in munich, but it was never built because a lot of people were angry with wagner for being in debt in spite of having lots of money from the king.
he spent a lot of time travelling and conducting in order to raise money for this huge project.
he died of heart failure when he was staying in venice.
after the war, the music was thought of as being something of the nazis.
she was the goddess of marriage and childbirth.
on this day, lambs and other cattle were sacrificed in her honor.
it was owned by king arthur.
the first was the one merilin put into the stone and said that the throne will be taken by the one who will take the sword out of the stone.
the sword was located at a magical lake where the lady of the lake gave it to arthur.
all these swords were made my an elf.
during his life people thought he was one of the greatest composers.
he also wrote lots of church music, most of which is not common today.
he lived in the period called the renaissance.
any records of his birth were destroyed when the town burned in 1577.
he asked him to come and meet him.
this was the top job in italy and he was only 26.
king edward's rule is very good to the common and poor people, because he has lived that way for a while and knows how hard it is.
he worked as a book-binder for 6 years before becoming an actor.
one of the books he bound was "the lord of the rings".
it can also be used as an anesthetic.
some people who take cocaine begin to feel worried or anxious, or even experience feelings of paranoia.
if people use cocaine, they may take too much and get sick or even die.
this means that if a person starts taking the drug, they will want to keep taking it, and it will be hard to stop, even if the drug is making a person sick (ill).
the highest note is the a. the viola is played with a bow in the right hand.
playing with the bow is called arco.
when people see the viola, sometimes they think it is a violin.
it is also because the sound of the viola is only five notes lower than the sound of the violin.
to find out your size just get a yard stick and stick your arm out with your palm facing up.
it is near the river thames.
the queen lives there for part of the year.
the greeks could not enter the city or win the war.
the greeks built a large wooden horse and left it outside the gates of the city as a present for the trojans.
the trojans took the horse and put it inside their city, thinking it was a victory gift from the greeks.
they opened the city gates to let the other greeks enter troy.
it has four seats and two doors.
normally it is bought by small families or young adults because the car is quite cheap and also the tax isn't very high.
both have five seats and four doors.
it has five seats and four or three doors.
it has five seats and can have two to five doors.
it has five seats and five doors.
because it was prophesied that he would bring the end and destruction of troy, he was left to die in the wilderness.
but alexandros was found by another man, who took him as a son and named him paris.
it is a grass and poison pokémon.
she is said to be the most beautiful woman in the world.
sometimes this is also called "public key cryptography", because one of the can be given to everyone.
the other key must be kept private.
a mixture is something made by mixing.
one of those pieces was a fantasy on the famous tune "greensleeves".
there are three older meanings which are all still used today.
it happened in an industrial plant in the italian town of seveso.
it is divided into many communes.
it is between the greece and anatolia.
a given name is a name which is used for a single person, to separate it from a group of people, especially if these all have the same family name.
a family name is a name shared by people in the same family.
children have the same family name as one or both of their parents.
when a women gets married, she may change her family name to be the same as her husband.
smith is the family name shared by the parents mary and john, and their children david and kate.
each culture has a different order for a person's family name and given name.
in english, the family name is always at the end, so it is also called a last name.
a family name is also called a surname.
he also baptized jesus and other people.
many people call it a weed.
its seeds are like little parachutes that fly away with the wind, spreading and growing more dandelions.
the words are usually in latin.
the words usually come from the bible.
some musicians only play music when they have written music in front of them, but it can be great fun to improvise music.
it is a way of composing.
it is quite tricky when a group of people are improvising together.
they have to listen to one another and get ideas from one another.
it can be a very exciting way of making music.
sailors would try to go to them because of their singing, and their ships would get destroyed on the rocks, and they would drown.
some of them do sex scenes.
the models had to gain weight do the movie.
in the middle ages a city grew around the monastery.
since the weather is not always as good, in many years its a battle with the mud.
they had already written eighty songs, but they still wrote some new songs for their next album.
the other songs they used had already appeared on their previous eps.
bellamy said they wanted to start making new music soon after this.
only men were allowed as actors.
pepper is one of the most common spices used around the world.
it is very common in european cuisine, and has been known and traded for a very long time.
few if any controlled studies have been carried out to answer the question.
they are used as spices or as vegetables, and also have some use in medicine.
they are then used to make food more spicy.
it is now used in many other situations.
this is because of the many blood vessels in the head and face.
he is killed at the end of the trojan war by neoptolemus, so he could not be a new king of troy, or want revenge.
this path is known as an orbit.
from this we can find that the earth is actually moving at about 67,000 miles per hour through space.
because of this many suitors came who wanted to marry penelope, because then they would own her land and wealth, and become king of ithaca.
penelope thinks of several tricks so that she does not have to marry one of the suitors.
one trick is that she tells the suitors that she will first weave a cloth for the funeral of odysseus' father, and when she was finished she would marry one of the suitors.
a different way of playing it would be to start the tune with the right hand.
in that example the left hand imitated the right hand at first.
if the second part had continued to imitate all the way through the piece it would have been a canon.
the important thing is that each part (i.e.
it is not one part singing the tune and the rest just accompanying.
there can be two or more notes in one part against one in the other e.g.
there is a whole system for this called “species”.
putting the top part at the bottom.
the more parts there were the harder it was to compose because it all had to fit so that it sounded good.
music for several voices written in this way is called polyphonic music.
guided by voices
guided by voices was very famous for bringing out many albums.
while he was teaching, he created lots of music for the band.
people also thought that it would be possible to create humans that are healthier, and perhaps more intelligent.
galton thought the best way to do this in his day was first to learn more about heredity, and also to tell people that they should only marry people who were smart and strong.
the second type would try to decrease the number of "bad" people in the world by finding ways to make it so that "bad" people would not breed.
they also passed laws which said that people of different races could not get married to one another.
this law allowed for the forced sterilisation of a certain group of people.
it belongs to hades, and it guards the gate of the greek underworld.
it has a snake for a tail and its mane is made up of snakes.
it is caused by a virus.
only people can get this disease.
many people who survive become blind because of the damage the virus does to the eyes.
in 1979, the who said the disease no longer existed, and no one would ever get sick from it again.
he also had ideas about the state which he based on legalism and fought confucianism.
he has been called a military genius for his changes and new ideas.
he has also been called a bad leader because of the brutal and cruel things that happened when he was in charge.
was he a good leader for joining the groups together or was he a bad leader who took over and destroyed the traditional zulu ruling systems?
he lived with his mother in the court of the zulu leader of the day.
he grew up to become a great military leader.
there were other things that led to the mfecane.
people moved in search of food, and fought for what little food could be found.
he executed anyone who did not show enough sadness at the death of his mother.
it is also called hades after the god who rules there.
a lever is something that can be used by a lot of ways and this is one way by measuring things and by seeing which weighs more and (or) less.
pulleys are usually used in sets designed to make the amount of force needed to lift something smaller.
when he came back from there he liked some ideas of socialism.
at the beginning of world war i his people helped austria-hungary, because they prefered them from russia.
he was the first jew to win a prize.
the name of the book is made up of three words.
his year of birth and death are not known at this time.
he started the stoic school of philosophy.
how thick or how coarse the clothing was meant the season in which the clothes would be worn.
he was forced to watch some of the worst movies ever made.
when blaze starr first met governor long in 1958, her first feeling was
she was afraid she was going to jail when the governor of louisiana walked in with the police during a dance.
when the governor and the police gave blaze a standing ovation, she was dumbfounded.
blaze had never known a politician who went to a show bar for any reason other than to cause the dancers trouble.
after her show, the governor asked for her to come to his table.
her life was exciting and full of adventures.
it was not just women taking off their clothes to get men into bed.
blaze was close to her family.
often cosmetics are used to make someone more attractive to one person, or to a culture or sub-culture.
their use by men is less frequent.
the etruscans were people in north italy who became part of rome.
many of the gods below became part of the roman pantheon.
roman people wrote about the etruscans but what they wrote is now lost.
the whole work is about being safe in the hands of god.
on some clavichords many of the strings share more than one note.
for example: a c and c sharp might share the same string.
so c and c sharp could not be played together.
all the player can do is hold it down and allow the note to fade in sound.
it was not suitable for playing with other instruments because it was so quiet.
they were so small that the could be lifted up and put on a table.
this means that at least three notes are needed for harmony.
the use of a bow is called archery.
a person who uses a bow is an archer, and a person who makes bows is a fletcher.
a bow is made up of a long curved stick and a string which is tied to both ends.
they were known as the samanids.
they lost it to the mongols.
the boy of sand became alive.
this boy was guarding the way while parvati was taking a bath.
the boy did not allow him.
he cut the head of the boy.
indie music could also be very experimental, meaning that people try out things like new or different sounds.
it may be in our tests that we do not pick any value for "a" such that the equality fails.
if we do pick an "a" such that
what this test is used for.
this is like when someone reads a book, and to remember, they put what they read into their own words.
jesus never talked about it in his teaching.
in the old testament there are several places where there seems to be evidence for a trinity.
when jesus came the early christians had to make sense of the fact that god had come among them through the power of the holy spirit.
several things in the gospel of john are often thought to point to a god who is more than just one being.
the three persons of god are also mentioned in the second book of corinthians.
it was several hundred years after the life of jesus before christians generally accepted the idea that god was a trinity.
it was a difficult idea, because the hebrew scriptures talk about god being one.
the greeks and the romans could only understand christ as a person who was bringing god’s word.
it was not until the 4th century that the three were thought of as being the three parts of one whole god.
by the end of the century all christians had come to believe in god as a trinity.
in this time people built many old and beautiful buildings.
king andrew ii wrote about the village for the first time in 1233.
because of the name of the second part, which means "the land of mojš", we believe that all the village was the property of a certain mr.
people built the palace in about 1750-1800.
many important people were born in mošovce.
these will probably be boys whose voices will soon be breaking and are starting to get lower.
some baritones have voices not quite low enough to be a true bass, and prefer to call themselves bass-baritones.
her parents were aristocrats so she was rich enough to go to school.
she later had a school where young aristocratic women received an education before marriage.
harry potter and the order of the phoenix
they are attacked by some of their enemies.
it is the smaller moon of mars.
this is about as far as a car can travel on the highway in 15 minutes.
because of this, people in ancient greece were always buried with a coin under their tongue to pay charon.
those who could not pay him had to wander the banks of the acheron for one hundred years.
later it was said that he was the son of ares and aphrodite.
the city got city rights in 1340 and city walls in 1360.
in 1920, the city held more than 500,000 people for the first time in its history
he has done some long walks to raise money for charity.
so apollo followed her while she ran away, until she came to the river of her father peneus.
there she wanted help from peneus, who turned her into a laurel tree so she would be safe from apollo.
there are several women who could be his mother, because the different stories and writers are not sure.
he was the best friend of achilles.
his rule was important because it was the first time england and scotland had agreed to have the same monarch.
james was very educated and good at learning.
in 1997 he had to leave his home, after it was flooded by the water of the dam.
since that time he tries to get together with other people fair damages from the peoples republic of china.
after this one he was arrested by police and hit so he cannot move since that time and is crippled.
these pieces did not belong to any opera or ballet, they were just written to be heard at concerts.
it has a very big natural harbour.
it was used in world war ii for some ships to set off for france on d-day.
when on the ground, they walk on their feet and finger knuckles.
after a pregnancy of 8½ - 9 months the female gives birth to usually one baby.
he writes most of the songs.
the led lights up when power is run through it.
they most often have a little clip, to hold it on your shirt or something.
it may be quite a long piece.
of course, there are lots of different ways of writing a symphony, but this is the pattern that was used by joseph haydn who is known as the “father of the symphony”, and many composers since have used his pattern of movements for their symphonies.
it is often used to describe music which is quite long and develops tunes over a long period.
there were political problems because governments ruled only for a very short time, not long enough to be able to make important decisions.
it is also called an avatar.
an avatar is a deity coming to the earth in the form of an animal, a human being or in any other form.
he entered the sea and brought back the vedas.
he may be compared with noah.
he entered the water and carried the earth on its body.
hiranyakashipu was not happy at his son and wanted to burn him to death.
he went on to organize the whole catholic church at the council of nicea, even though he himself did not get baptized until near the end of his life.
she was queen and her brother was king.
her brother was only 12 years old, so she was the real leader.
but some of the men who worked for her didn't like the way she decided everything.
a group of them decided to take her power from her, so she had to leave the country.
she lay down on a carpet.
caesar fell in love with her and they became lovers.
his place was taken by three rulers.
cleopatra was very rich and she used her money to help antonius.
her money was not enough to win the war.
he became the ruler of the roman empire and took control of egypt from cleopatra.
two of them died of illness, but her daughter became a queen in africa.
there are many stories told of how rich cleopatra was, but we cannot be sure if these are true.
another story says that she made a bet with antonius that she could make the most expensive meal ever.
his name is often thought of together with that of claude debussy, but their music is really very different.
ravel liked children and animals and his music is often about them.
both parents were interested in culture.
soon after he was born the family moved to paris and stayed there.
when world war i broke out ravel felt very strongly that he wanted to do something for his country.
he bought himself a house outside paris.
for several years he had already been finding it difficult to sleep, and this may have been the beginning of the brain disease which would finally kill him.
soon he could no longer sign his own name, he could hardly move and hardly speak.
we know nothing about his sexual life.
his music came to him during walks on his own, in the country or in paris, often at night, and in any weather.
then he would come home and write them down.
he worked at each composition until it was perfect and never showed it to anybody until it was ready.
he liked to collect little things such as toys, and these objects often became part of the music.
he is famous for his music for harpsichord and for his operas.
he is also known as an important music theorist by writing many books on the matter.
between the age of 12 and 20 he had no musical education.
he wanted to leave school and study music but his father would not let him.
during this time he earned some money by playing the piano at the homes of rich people.
smetana, who only spoke german, agreed with the nationalists’ ideas, but he still did not realize how important it would be for him in the future to be able to speak czech.
it was not easy for him in prague because he was only known there as a pianist and teacher.
in the end he was writing four bars a day.
he did not recognize his own family.
his father was a butcher and innkeeper.
just before his 12th birthday he left school and started to learn how to be a butcher.
a year later he left home to go to school in zlonice.
he learned a lot about music there, and he also learned german.
his teacher persuaded dvořák's parents that he should have a musical career, so they sent him to study music in prague at the organ school.
this was a time when there was suddenly a great interest in national culture in bohemia.
for several years he still had to teach in order to earn enough money to live.
he destroyed a lot of his compositions which he thought were not his best works.
he got a job as church organist.
he was also not being paid all his salary.
this was quite close to polish.
most of his greatest works were written towards the end of his life.
at this time he was in love with a young woman called kamila.
he continued his music education there.
he studied at the prague organ school for a year, but he was very poor and could not afford to go to concerts.
she was still under 16 when they married.
by the time he was finishing it his daughter had died.
some of his sadness can be felt in the opera.
in his final years janáček wrote most of the great works for which he is world-famous.
he was very proud when his country became independent after the war.
he was also very happy because he was in love with kamila stösslová, who was 38 years younger than himself.
he was working on the third act of his last opera "from the house of the dead".
they spent some time looking for him.
his music for instruments often started as programmatic, although a lot of it can be enjoyed without knowing the story it tells.
the two men were very different.
they may see and feel things differently than normal people and have hallucinations.
some people can continue with their lives while having unusual experiences while other people will need medical help.
some of them can be seen as erotic.
the channel shows lots of different programmes including famous ones such as only fools and horses and eastenders.
it is a very old city and its old name was pataliputra.
he wrote some of his own stories, but more often he wrote criticisms about what other people had written.
he is especially famous for writing a dictionary.
we know about some of the funny things he said because his friend james boswell wrote a book about him.
samuel went to school in lichfield.
when he was nineteen he went to the university of oxford, but he was so poor that he had to leave without taking a degree.
a few years later he married a woman 21 years older than him.
they went to live in london, where he tried to make a living by writing but for many years he was very poor.
it was not until 1762 that he became famous and the government gave him a pension of three hundred pounds a year.
johnson said to him that it would have been nice to have had help when he was needing it.
it was the first time a dictionary had been published that gave examples of how the words had been used by well-known writers.
it takes its name from the morava river which flows from the north to the south of the land.
people started using it in the year 1996.
it acts as the home of many tropical fish and other animals.
this makes it hard for ships to see them, but are easy for ships to hit them.
his most famous book is the "ramacharitamanasa".
this is a prize given in the united states.
the prize is considered a very high prize.
rhea is seen between two lions or on a chariot pulled by lions.
they ruled with the ways of peace and no violence.
it looks like they believe that it is the cause for every tragedy on earth, including the deaths of soldiers killed in war.
they certainly think that a lot of tragedies result from love between a man and a man or love between a woman and a woman, and the tolerance of it.
most christian churches, even ones that feel that this kind of love is wrong, do not agree with the way this church practices.
in 1985 the new green party prepared to enter into a german state government for the first time in its history.
because of that she was buried alive (put in the earth so she died because she could not breathe), which was the common punishment for a vestal virgin who did not remain a virgin.
traditionally a virgin is a person that did not have sexual intercourse.
virgin women usually have a hymen.
it is a thing that blocks the vagina.
it is a sign that woman was really a virgin.
in islamic countries they show this blood to the relatives of bride and spouse after the wedding night so that they believe that the woman was a virgin before getting married.
a hymen can be broken by riding a horse or playing sports, but this does not mean the woman is not a virgin.
the city has people living in it from a large number of different cultures.
most of the city is still there or is rebuilt by now.
they are water and ocean nymphs.
his children were called the titans.
many of the greek gods were her descendants.
zeus came to her looking like artemis, and with him she was the mother of arkas.
with zeus she is the mother of dionysus.
an award is something given to a person or group of people if they do something very good.
she is a daughter of nereus and doris.
she is married to peleus and with him the mother of achilles.
it is also called as nellai.
a servant or domestic worker is someone who works for somebody to help them to run their home.
a servant is not the same a slave, because slaves were forced to work for people.
at meal times he would have been something like a head waiter.
male servants were often called “valets”.
although servants were not slaves, many of them in history were often treated badly.
the music education there was very good and vivaldi wrote a lot of his music for his pupils to play.
he was the brother of menelaos.
in the trojan war he was the highest leader of the greek armies.
he was the brother of agamemnon.
the other players rely on him or her to keep a steady beat and not to play so loudly that the tune cannot be heard.
the first known piece of music to be written down was hurrian.
they lived in caves in the far west, near the gates of the underworld.
they were sent through one of two gates there.
the other gate was made of ivory, from there the false and meaningless dreams come from.
nereus is a sea god in greek mythology.
he writes a lot of his music for the scottish chamber orchestra and helps them to take music out to schools so that children can listen and join in with his music.
it is about birth and new life.
he lived in a cave on an island, and he had sheep.
on the island also lived several other kyklopes.
the next morning polyphemos lets his sheep out of the cave, but touches their backs so no one of the men could ride out on them.
they struggled without fighting, while asking for the rights of their followers.
these mountains stand across the indus's path, and the river is forced to turn to the south-west.
most terrible of all are the earthquakes.
he also wrote books about yoga.
but then the god hermes came and told her that the gods said that she had to let odysseus go.
it originated in black culture but may be spoken by members of any group.
someone who makes a special study of music theory is a music theorist.
people who think up their own music are composers.
people who play or sing music are “performers”.
it is important for both composers and performers to understand what makes the music sound the way it does.
in the times of the ancient greeks the famous philosopher pythagoras tried to explain how instruments are tuned.
he understood the science of the vibrations that the instruments make and explained how and why the octave is divided into twelve parts.
in the middle ages there were several famous music theorists who wrote books about music theory.
their ideas are very interesting for us because they tell us what people thought about music at that time.
they tell us a lot about how music was played in those days: how some rhythms were played quite freely and how ornaments in the music were played.
in this way they will understand what makes a good piece of music.
if composers want to break the rules when they write their own compositions, they are free to do that.
music theory is important for people who perform music because all these things help people to understand the music they are playing.
this system of medicine and medication is more than 3000 years old.
there is a story about her birth.
she cared him for the first four years of his life.
she and her husband only had a donkey and old she-camel.
she did not even have enough milk to feed the other child in her care.
it was also the year of famine and drought so they would constantly pray for rain.
they couldn’t expect to gain many riches from a child who was an orphan.
every woman got a child to bring up but halima, who had arrived last and did not find a child to foster.
she was ready to go back when she decided to return and collect the child muhammad, even though he was an orphan.
halima was at the very back of the group of women but now was at the front of the group.
halima knew that she had a blessed child with all the miracles and blessings she was seeing with her own eyes.
they used to complain to the shepherd to take the sheep and goats to the same place that halima takes her flock!
there were many more signs about how her life was turned around.
the angel then returned the heart to muhammad's body before going away.
she rushed out and found muhammad standing with a pale white face.
muhammad was returned to the care of his mother amina and continued to live with her and barakah.
the legend also says that she is the wife of brahma, one of the gods of the hindus.
the festival is held every year.
sometimes it was music played on ordinary (acoustic) instruments which was then changed in some way by the tape recorder.
sometimes they took sounds from everyday life such as the sound of water, traffic noise or bird song.
all these noises were put together in the way the composer wanted by using the tape recorder.
it started in the late 1960s.
they use it to take some pictures.
they will go to other countries, around the country where there is no war.
this is usually land where no one wants to live.
an argument is a reason that is supposed to prove one side is right.
someone who is always arguing with people is argumentative.
the main reason that the war started was the united states thought that iraq had dangerous weapons of mass destruction that they were not telling the truth about.
this protects their eyes from the bright light of welding.
people who ride horses often wear helmets, to protect them if they fall off the horse.
he continued to work on the memorial until his death in 1982
ziolkowski's wife and family have continued to work the crazy horse memorial.
the city was one of seven holy cities of the hindus.
it is also one of the four most important places of pilgrimage for the hindus.
soon after the death of krishna, the city went below the sea.
there are different views about the time of writing of the ramayana.
some others think that it was written only around 1,800 years before.
all agree that the book is very old and was written before the mahabharata.
because they are the sons of pandu, they are known as pandavas.
these all are the five panadavas.
these duties are called the five pillars of islam.
the kaaba is a holy place for muslims and shows muslims that each and every muslim is equal in the eyes of god, and that he or she must be willing to give up anything are do anything for him.
a civil war is a war where the two sides involved in the fighting are both from the same country or kingdom.
after a few years of quarrelling, the members of parliament raised an army to fight against the king.
the king moved out of london and took the royal court to oxford, where he had more loyal followers than in london.
the first war was fought between king charles's army and the army of parliament.
during the war, a new leader had been found by parliament, a man called oliver cromwell, who was very good at leading an army and also had ideas about how to rule the country.
not everyone liked him, but he was the strongest leader and in time he became the ruler of the whole country.
he came back to fight another battle against the army of parliament.
some of his works are among the greatest music ever written.
twelve children were born into the family, but only four of them lived to grow up.
the family was poor, and the father tried to persuade his sons to help him in the school when they grew up.
he soon became very good at them all, and he was made leader of the emperor’s court chapel.
he was still only a boy when he was also given the chance to conduct the orchestra.
his teachers were all amazed at how quickly he learned.
by the age of 16 he had composed a lot of music including his first symphony.
he had been rejected by the army because he was too short (shorter than five feet) and his sight was very poor.
it is a very famous song.
another song which soon made him famous in all europe was "erlkönig".
he sent a very angry letter back saying he had not composed that rubbish!
it was difficult to find enough time to compose because he was a teacher.
a man called schober persuaded schubert to give up teaching so that he could spend all his time composing.
he wrote so many wonderful pieces that it seems strange that the music publishers did not want to publish them.
he had to leave the schober’s house and find his own rooms.
he asked to be buried near beethoven.
their graves were just three places apart.
if you try to sing them in a translation it is difficult to make it sound good.
it is best to hear them in german and to have a translation so that you understand what is being sung.
he goes out into the cold winter woods and all nature seems to reflect the way he feels inside.
the eighth is called the “unfinished”.
a lot of people still argue about why he left it unfinished.
most of his life he was supported by his friends who gave him manuscript paper when he could not afford it.
the disease can be very dangerous in pregnant women.
it is in a particular "key".
this means that it changes key.
but the music will not sound finished until it goes back to the original key.
it will not sound finished until it goes back to the first key in the last two lines.
an atonal piece is one where there is no feeling of a home key.
this got rid of the old anthem.
there are many different kinds of minimalism.
usually this music is tonal so that it is firmly in one key.
after another 13 seconds this happens again so that in the end the two performers are together again.
this music has to be listened to in a different way from other kinds of music.
he was brought up in russia.
he based it on music from the classical music period but changed it.
the technological singularity is the idea that the time people will take to make breakthroughs in different areas is getting shorter and that one day it will become so short that no-one knows what will happen.
the first foundations of the city were around 539 before the birth of christ.
this makes it the second largest city in france, but only the third largest when it comes to urban area.
the port is also among the most important ones in the mediterranean.
by the greek sailors of phocaea, this great city is the oldest in france and surely the most complex.
this was a greek colony in asia minor.
the flood want to use every living thing in the galaxy for food.
this is the only way to stop the flood, to starve them by killing all their food.
they also destroy one of them in the process.
the covenant have come to take the portal that will allow them to get to the new halo so they can fire it.
hundreds of years ago, when people got sick or died, it cost a lot of money to take care of them or bury them.
people had the idea of joining their money together to help each other out.
eventually, people started to make a business out of collecting enough money to help people who had big problems.
figuring out how much money needed to be collected from people to be used if problems happened was not easy.
the tests are not the same in different parts of the world.
their name comes from the word for perch.
he has a third eye that does all the destroying when it opens when shivji gets angry.
he is the son of iapetos.
zeus forced him to hold the heaven on the western edge of the world.
later, the story about him changed and it was said that he held the whole world on his shoulders.
atlas was pleased to be free from its weigh but heracles tricked him into holding it again.
she had not named a person to be ruler after her death, so her cousin's son took over.
moment of silence
a moment of silence is a short time when people think or pray without making noise.
people use a moment of silence to show respect for people who have died or when something else bad has happened.
sometimes people choose the length of a moment of silence to connect with the event being honored.
for example, a person might choose to have one minute of silence for each death being honored.
a person in charge of a group will tell everyone when the moment begins and ends.
a moment of silence may come before or after other events with symbolic meaning.
in the united states, some people say that allowing prayer as part of a moment of silence means that moments of silence can make it hard to keep the separation of church and state (the idea that religion and government should not affect each other).
they can be used for other thoughts that are not religious.
many people who want time for prayers in public schools and government meetings use moments of silence so that some people can pray and other people do not have to pray.
he has said that a simple moment of silence at the start of each school day is a good idea.
many people believe that prayer is not allowed in united states public schools, but this is not true.
students can form clubs where they can pray, and they can pray alone, but they cannot lead prayers at school events.
the reason prayer is not allowed at those times is because of the first amendment.
this moment would last one minute.
judge hilton said that the law has a secular (not religious) purpose, that the law does not make religion more important or less important, and that the law does not make government and religion be too close to each other.
he said that the only thing students had to do because of the law was sit and be quiet.
they think they are a bad idea because the laws are made to give students time to pray, and that makes religion more important than non-religion.
this was similar to worship of a mother goddess in the mediterranean.
if she is shown seated by the side of shiva, she has two arms.
her image shows that she has four arms.
the river dried up long ago.
this river is also considered a goddess.
she had the powers of all the male gods combined.
she is a very powerful goddess.
sometimes she is also called chandi.
he again started to work as a lawyer in england.
this country was to be named pakistan.
the government of india wants to give the house to the government of pakistan.
after the change the ddr needed a new rank to be sure there was only one high command.
the show was cancelled after four seasons and ended with a cliffhanger.
when people talk about an interplanetary internet, they are talking about a problem they are still trying to solve - the problem of making the internet work between different planets.
this works fine because the messages only take a second to get back and forth.
but if you were sending that message to mars, it would take about ten minutes for the message to get there, and another ten for it to get back.
that is the problem people are trying to solve when they talk about the interplanetary internet.its a new and a very intresting concept
then they also started to pick and to gather fruits.
this theory told the people that kings had the order of the gods to rule the country.
for the first time in the history of china, large number of persons also moved from one area to other area for settlement.
many kings ruled different parts of china.
in some cases, a king ruled just a village with a small fort.
some of them still continue to be important.
they had taken over all the smaller areas.
many new things were done for the first time.
merchants used the silk road to reach china.
they provide a close fit and come in either white or in other colors like blue, pink, or red.
they number around 5 to 7 million people and most of the people in the group live in india.
he is well known as dr.
the reason that a double bass is not used is that it would sound too loud and heavy.
all four parts were very clear and individual.
beethoven was becoming very frustrated because he was deaf and could not hear his own music, but he could imagine it all in his head.
there are lots of great works by famous composers, as well as some music which has been written for young players who are learning.
after the title of a piece of music means “work”.
it is followed by a number.
when a composer writes his or her first piece of music it could be called “opus 1”.
giving pieces of music opus numbers helps us to know which piece of music it is.
you cannot always tell from a composer’s opus numbers the order in which the works were composed.
some of them are long operas, others are tiny little pieces for the piano he might have written in a hurry one day.
some of them combined and became bigger like the kingdom of the kurus.
he started to follow the path of ahmisa.
ashoka is considered one of the best rulers the world has ever seen.
after that they became weak for various reasons.
major reasons for their weakness was fights among themselves and fighting with the sakas.
some of these kingdoms continue to survive for hundreds of years during different periods of the history of india.
he also attacked many parts of punjab.
he took many valuable things from india.
the life and times of michael k
tort law is the part of law for most harms that are not either criminal or based on a contract.
if a person is hurt by someone else, he or she can sue in court.
money that the court orders the defendant to pay is called damages.
an order to stop doing something is called an injunction.
sometimes the same act can be both a tort and a crime.
they usually happen because someone was not being careful.
an example of negligence is driving a car while not paying attention to the road.
a person's mind or reputation can be injured by saying things about them that are not true.
a person's property can be injured by taking it from them without permission or saying that it belongs to someone else.
saying things about someone that are not true is called slander, and writing things about someone that are not true is called libel.
making someone stay in one place when they want to leave is called false imprisonment or false arrest.
that means that the lawyer will talk to the judge for the party.
the party that starts the lawsuit is called the plaintiff because they are complaining about something the other side has done.
the other party is called the defendant because it must defend what it has done.
both sides or parties will show evidence or proof that they are right and the other side or party is wrong.
the parties may also ask witnesses questions about what the argument or disagreement is about.
then the court will do something to make the winning party happy again.
the court might make the losing party pay the winner money, or it might make the losing party stop doing something that made the winner unhappy.
in the days when people with big houses or castles kept their own musicians, they might have their own private orchestra which played in the large hall.
chamber music can be any group of instruments from two up to about eight or nine.
there is no conductor, so each musician has to listen carefully to the others and learn to play together as a small team.
the musicians can also hear their own playing better than they can in an orchestra.
some living composers have written a lot of music for young players who are not very advanced.
most men in the world are not circumcised.
there are some countries where most men are circumcised like the united states, south korea, israel, and countries where most people are muslim.
circumcision is becoming less common, and many people say there is no need to circumcise boys.
other people think we should continue to circumcise boys, because it may help stop the passing of hiv.
the end of this harpoon was not at all like a spear.
the whale might swim day and night with no stop for several days.
this a very cruel way of killing whales as it hurts them a lot.
an opinion is something a person or a group of people think.
sometimes companies try to find out what people think about something by asking a lot of people their opinion.
they might be trying to find out whether they think the government is good or bad or whether enough is being done about global warming.
a school year is the time of year when students go to school.
an audience is a group of people that go to see the same thing (like a play or a movie).
a group is a collection or set of things.
the things in a group often share a property or are similar in some way.
for example, the things in the group might be in the same place.
people and animals need to eat because they cannot make their own food like the plants.
the animals then eat each other for the energy.
they stand up when they use a shower and usually do not wear clothes in a shower.
there are different kinds of showers.
another is the one in the picture.
this is also in b flat, but sounds an octave lower than the ordinary b flat clarinet.
brass instruments come in several different keys.
if their music is written in the wrong key for the instrument on which they are playing they can still play it in the right key.
if a pianist is accompanying a singer and the song is a little too high for the singer’s voice it is very useful if he is able to transpose it down so that the music sounds in a lower key.
for example: if the music is written in the key of c major it could be transposed down a whole tone so that it sounds in b flat major.
this is a better way of transposing.
3) by hearing what the music should sound like and thinking in the new key.
it is very important to understand the key system in order to be able to transpose.
they forever followed the person who did a crime (even if the person had a good reason to do it), and they even could make the person go mad.
they are often shown with snakes on their heads, blood coming out of their eyes, and looking very horrific.
even the erinyes accepted the decision, and from then on they were also called eumenides, because they could also let people go in peace if their crime was done for a good reason.
there are in fact two different groups of goddesses which were known at different times: today they are called the first and second generation to know which ones are meant.
they were the children of zeus and themis.
list of people in greek mythology
this is a list of (mortal) people that are in greek mythology.
she was the wife of amphitryon.
because of that he put his daughter danaë in a tower where noone was allowed to enter, so she could not have a child.
but the god zeus could enter in the form of a golden rain, and with him her child was perseus.
there they are found by diktys, who lets them live with him.
he was the king of argos.
because of that he put his daughter danaë in a tower where noone was allowed to enter, so she could not have a child.
but the god zeus could enter in the form of a golden rain, and with him her child was perseus.
there they are found by diktys, who lets them live with him.
she is the wife of perseus.
it has the upper body of a human, but below the waist it has the body of a horse.
this means that it is the soloist who decides how fast or slow to play.
this was at a time when the piano was a new instrument.
at the time everyone thought it was too hard for the soloist to play, but as composers wrote harder and harder music the players had to become better and better.
he played the violin like no one else had ever done, and because he was a thin, skinny man with a pale face and long hair people thought he looked like the devil.
the music may be played on the piano with the right hand playing the tune and the left hand playing the accompaniment.
music does not have to be a tune with accompaniment, although it often is.
the accompaniment does not always have to be lower than the tune.
to play the piano, the pianist has to learn to play a tune in the right hand and accompaniment in the left hand, or the tune might be passed from one hand to the other.
the tune should usually be played a little louder than the accompaniment.
they have to listen carefully to the instrument(s) they are accompanying, and play with the same kind of feeling.
it was not usual to write out all the notes for the keyboard player.
they needed to have a good understanding of music theory, especially of harmony.
places that are high up can be cold.
it is celebrated by letting of firecrackers by children to really light up the whole of india.
he is also known by other names like hanumat.
hanuma’s image shows him as a strong man with the face of a monkey.
he finds an important place in the ramayana.
he lives there with his wife named indrani, and several other smaller gods.
the name of that tree is "badri-tree".
the city continues to be an important religious place.
there are many temples in the city.
this is a very long period of time.
yamatai came into being when about 30 smaller parts of japan of that time united under a queen named himiko.
this period saw many important changes like introduction of the chinese writing system to japan.
the language used in this period was called late old japanese.
some of them were very learned persons.
there were about 200 of them.
they ruled from a place named edo.
they also ordered some foreigners to go out of japan.
at last it was ended under force.
they agreed that in the event of any attack or war on any of them, they would fight together.
world war i to end of world war ii.
japan became an important friend of the usa when it entered into the cold war with korea.
this is the period after the second world war.
they are warm for most of the year but have a lot of rainfall.
they also have a very big number of different plants and animals.
there are special people who live in rainforests.
they live off the plants and animals.
history of saudi arabia covers many thousand years with lots of people from different cultures living there.
these are places in the deserts where growth and water are available.
the family also faced opposition from other powerful families of arabia
on 20th may 1927, the government of the united kingdom accepted him as the king of the areas ruled by him.
his kingdom now became a sovereignty.
all the regions under his control were united to form the state of saudi arabia by the year 1932.
the king also discussed with these two countries to stop war.
it is associated with shiva, one of the three main gods of the hindus.
the us army and us air force are both branches of the us military.
people have lived in the area for hundreds of thousands of years but it became a permanent town by the time of the saxons.
the domesday book says there were 120 people living there in the 1100s.
these cannot be seen from a distance.
even though the birds were bred easily in captivity, little was done to make sure enough birds were bred to avoid their dying out.
finally, they were killed in large numbers because farmers thought they were pests.
this led to even more being shot by hunters as they gathered about the wounded and dead members of the flock.
then the contestant and the six celebrities would write their answer to the question on a piece of paper.
they would tell it to him.
their top 3 answers to the question (e.g.
then the contestant would choose one of those answers or make up their own.
it is also sometimes used to mean a group of other vehicles, such as trucks or buses.
today's view of how disease happens is that those small organisms cause a reaction in the body of those affected by a disease.
this reaction is what people call the disease.
another view of how diseases came to be was that they sponaneously generated.
a cross with the body of jesus on it is called a crucifix.
the two men always showed one another the music they were writing so that they could help one another by offering criticism.
in his old age he became quite deaf.
there is argument about whether it is really a country or not.
it is caused by a bacterium, which causes the intestines to swell up a lot.
the main symptom of dysentery is having blood in the excrement, and it is usually treated with antibiotics.
the klondike gold rush happened in the 1890's when many people went to a river in canada called klondike who hoped to find gold there and become rich.
very few people found any gold.
they were also called the guomindang.
sometimes the two groups stopped fighting and helped each other.
but soon they started fighting again.
agree that it is part of azerbaijan.
the first race was in 1909.
its stories are now well known in different parts of the world.
one time tiberius sent fire engines to a city he thought was on fire because of an auroral display
there are very few of them left, because loss of the jungle has made many of them die.
they have very long and strong arms.
they also have hands that are good for climbing.
after a pregnancy of 230-260 days the female gives birth to usually one baby, but sometimes two.
it is called midland, because many years ago it was the midway point between two bigger cities in texas, fort worth and el paso.
this makes blue whales the largest animals ever to be on earth, even bigger than the largest dinosaurs.
groups of them sometimes kill large whales, eating their lips and tongues.
however, they have never been known to harm humans in the wild.
in many countries, there are no laws to directly solve this problem.
it usually ate meat but it might have been an omnivore.
most of them have a shell.
the hindu scriptures and the hindu mythology tell that all the above things came out of the ocean for the good of humanbeings.
she belonged to a famous family of massachusetts.
she studied a number of books and became knowledgeable.
it was planned and built to be the state capital in 1855.
it is one of his most played pieces.
things that are made into vodka.
it is not known if it was the russians or the poles who made the first drinks that could be classified as vodka.
different steps are involved in the process.
the second step is called fertilization.
it has been known for a very long time.
it takes between 6 months and 2 years to cure a person.
with the illness progressing the sense of touch will become less and less (until the patient feels completely numb).
thousands of people from the united states that had the disease were sent there.
in the same year, her husband also died of the same yellow fever epidemic.
when she was a girl of 17 years, she married james monroe.
she also went along with her husband.
there are still some artefacts that can be visited in a museum
the cheetah is not in this group because it is a fast runner and cannot climb trees.
a superpower is a country that is one of the most powerful countries in the world.
in the years following world war ii, the united nations was formed.
although the snow leopard is named "leopard" and also looks a bit like a smaller leopard, they are not closely related.
they weigh up to 75 kilograms.
its fur is very long and thick to protect it against the cold.
their feet are also big and furry, which helps them to walk on snow easier.
in winter they go down to live in the forests at a height of about 2000 meters.
after a pregnancy of about a hundred days the female gives birth to usually 2-3 babies.
they lived in different places before her husband became the president.she went to school in london and france.
she took over the role of the first lady, as the president's wife had died 17 years earlier.
when they came back to the usa in 1839, she took up the role of the first lady during the presidency of her father-in-law.
during the winter, they lived in their family home in south carolina.
as the daughter-in-law of the president, she acted as the first lady for about a month in 1941.
he was a young lawyer at that time.
she was also interested in public affairs.
she spent about four years in france in a city named pau.
she also traveled to many parts of europe.
the two cities are divided by the river irwell.
she received a very good education.
her husband was a banker from baltimore.
she was the elder daughter of her parents, captain joel and elizabeth childress.
she also helped privately her husband in preparing his speeches and in his correspondence.
her husband died just after three months of her retirement as the president.
one of the reasons being her young age when she became the first lady.
she became the first lady when she was only 41.
the other reason that she was having a good health.
but she never entered the white house.
her father was a judge and his name was john cleves symmes.
her mother died in 1776 when anna was hardly one year old.
they cared for the child till the end of the war with the british.
her father had worked as a sea captain, and then became a merchant.
she immediately started to act as the first lady.
this is the single example of two ladies acting as the first lady in the history of the united states.
she continued to live there with her husband.
a receipt is usually a piece of paper, but in some parts of the world they can also be hard tokens.
receipts are used to show or prove that someone has got or received something.
it usually shows proof that something has been paid for.
it might also be used to show that something was brought in to be fixed, for example, a bicycle.
an error is the difference between a number that someone thought was true, and the number that someone actually saw.
each fight can last only for a period of time, after the time ends, judges decide who is the winner.
the referee in the fight will make sure no one gets hurt too badly and that rules are followed.
some public fights took place at the end of the 19th century.
this can be because of their attention given to the combat by means of holds.
many people were killed or wounded in this long war.
the fighting continued for about ten years.
no message could come inside the city, or go outside the city.
amin and his two sons were killed in the fighting by this time.
but they could never control all parts of afghanistan.
people in most countries around the world did not like what the soviet union was doing in afghanistan.
the soviet union looked very bad in the eyes of the world for trying to control this country.
many thought that the war was against islam.
the soviet army was really in very low spirits or "morale" because they were unable to control the people and were treated only as invaders everywhere they went.
she was a bright student and she got a very good education.
her first months at the white house marked the mourning for the death of rachel donelson jackson.
she continued to act as the first lady for few years.
she left the white house for some time.
she also started to act as the first lady.
it was the only time in the history of usa that two women acted at the same time as the first lady.
she was the first president’s wife to die in the white house.
her parents belonged to a famous and wealthy family of new york.
he was already having eight children with his first wife.
it talks about the news and gives information about things that are happening at the moment.
it has the smallest amount of people of any country.
the sun bear is the smallest bear.
its ears are small and round.
it cannot see very well, but its sense of smell is very good.
at the age of 17 elizabeth priscilla cooper started to work as an actress.
they took the role of the first lady.
these are generally free and may be used on most of the computers.
it was about four former us army commandos who are running from the military (who think they committed a crime that they didn't) and make money by helping people with their problems.
the people he works with soon find out and fire him.
two of his brothers were assassinated, the third died in an aeroplane crash in world war ii.
before that she had many miscarriages.
she got the questions in advance.
for sometime, she stayed in a farm she had got as a marriage gift from her father.
there she gave birth to her first baby.
their two small daughters died in 1820.
in this river delta, waters of two big rivers of the area flow into: the waters of the euphrates and the tigris rivers.
there are about 30 such agreements.
they give items to each other and follow a set of rules.
they have to give a special job to the other country.
the manchus changed their ways to be more like the chinese in order to rule them better.
with two people, the person sending the message is called the "hypnotist" and the person getting the message is called the "subject."
in 1843 he wrote a book about this with the title "neurypnology".
then it continues along the m74.
it then follows through a valley past the lake district and penrith.
it is the first toll road to be built in the united kingdom.
on its chest it has a white or yellow mark, which is shaped like an y or v. they have big feet with long claws.
it allows one to use less force to move an object.
you can take the blocks out from anything you make, and use them again to make other things.
when you buy a set, it will have all the pieces you need to build a type of thing.
the blocks are joined together by some buttons on the top and joined using places where the buttons can go into at the bottom.
new blocks made in 2008 can fit with old blocks as old as 1963, and blocks made for older children can join with blocks for children.
the blocks can join together no matter which set they come from.
lego has been so popular that people sometimes even use the word to talk about building blocks.
the exact number of giant pandas in the wild is not known.
the number of giant pandas in the wild seems to be increasing.
giant pandas have white fur on their bodies and black fur on their legs and shoulders.
they are usually born with a small amount of white fur.
they get more fur when they are about nine months old..
giant pandas mate between the months of march and may which is the summer months in china.
if she has 2 babies, she will only raise one baby, and the other baby dies, no one really knows how the female panda choose between the two.
their main source of food is bamboo.
these tales are one of the reasons why people would spend lots of money for the skin and fur of this precious animal.
usually they will sleep in a tent, or may not need to use one if the weather is warm.
when camping, people usually prepare food to eat that is easy to make.
it is the second largest island in the world.
new guinea is also very important for its nature and biology, because there are many different animals.
domestication is a change that happens in wild animals or plants, when they are kept by humans for a long time.
if humans take wild animals and plants and keep and breed them, over time the animals and plants may change.
the animals and plants become dependent on the humans who keep them, and they change in ways that are better for human use.
the first domestication of plants happened during the first use of agriculture.
night of the living dead
the main fighting was between two groups: the red army and the white army.
the red army was an army of communists.
the green army and the smaller groups fought among themselves, and sometimes they fought the red army and the white army.
the red army and the white army fought this war on three main regions.
most of the fighting in this period was on a small scale.
some foreign countries also helped the white army.
the white army almost lost its fighting power.
many soldiers of the white army had gathered in crimea.
the red army continued to fight with them.
many of them were very educated and expert persons.
people always remembered their bad results.
each member country keeps a special office.
member countries may use the information.
characteristics from observations have been that events last 12 to 18 months and could happen every two to seven years.
a lock is a thing that keeps people from opening something, such as a door or a box.
people can close the lock on a door to keep people from coming in.
someone must turn the dial to the right numbers in the right order.
a key lock is a lock that uses a key (a piece of metal with teeth like a little saw) to open it.
someone must put the key in the lock and turn it to open the lock.
this lock is used in doors and locks for boxes.
an electronic lock is a special lock that can only be opened with a message from a computer.
other new things are wants and fears.
these change when a want or fear is done or when the sim wakes up from sleep.
for example, a sim with the family aspiration might want to have a child, but a sim with the money aspiration might want to get a job instead.
they can go there by using the phone to call a taxi.
they are listed in the order that they came out in the shops.
they are meant to come out 2 times a year.
a large amount of rides and shops are included with the game.
the game also added support for buildings to be made using walls to make ride entrances.
night and day is a new feature.
it also adds some new music to the game.
the word "fuhua" spreads from the right to the left at the front.
students have to wear their tie with the blazer.
the school holds its speech day every year in march or april.
some of them were mild, but few of them were very serious.
this religion has a long history.
no one is certain about the time when he lived.
no government controls the red cross.
it is the only private group to have its jobs set out by international law.
at that time there was a family of instruments called the viols.
they are among the most beautiful pieces written for the cello.
this means that the left thumb is pressing down on one or two strings high up over the fingerboard.
they also won many parts of north america.
it is the city which is economically most important to the country.
it is the place where the most damage happens.
this was not meant to be an error.
a homemaker is a person whose main job is to take care of their own family home and children.
because it has been the traditional job of a woman to be a "homemaker", a woman who spends most of her time caring for the family home has been called a "housewife".
this means that it has been the job of men to do work that either hunted food, grew food or earned money to pay for food, while the women have cared for children, prepared food for eating, cleaned the house, and made and cared for clothes.
one of the reasons is that a married woman usually had children and babies.
even in a society where homes were very simple and people did not own very many things, men and women did different jobs.
in "rural societies", where the main work is farming women have also taken care of gardens and animals around the house, and helped men with heavy work whenever a job needed doing in a hurry, usually because of the season.
it was seen as the job of a woman to be a "housewife" (homemaker).
often, if a family had a business, then not just the husband but also the wife would work to make money in the business.
they might stay at home and do "housework" for other family members, or they might work outside the house like a man.
in many urban societies, there has not been many jobs that a woman was allowed to do.
thousands of young women went to work in factories.
even though things like this happened, in most families where there was a husband and wife, people thought it was the job of the husband to earn money and the job of the woman to be a "housewife" (homemaker).
while the men were at war, their wives went to work to keep the countries running.
at the end of both wars, many men had died, and women kept doing many of these jobs.
many women in the 1970s believed that this was not treating men and women equally, and that women should do whatever job they were able to do, whether they were married or not.
at this time, when more and more women had good educations and were able to earn a lot of money, in some families (usually if their were young children to care for) the husband would be the person that was the homemaker.
in the late 20th century, it became harder and harder for a family to live on the wage of a man who has just an ordinary job.
many women who are mothers cannot stay at home and make homemaking their first job.
a bow tie is usually made of silk or polyester, and it is usually black.
to measure something is to give a number to some property of the thing.
measuring something puts the amount of the thing into numbers.
one can measure many other things.
most properties are measured using a number and a unit of measurement.
this means a tree that is ten times as tall as a meter stick is 10 meters tall.
these are shown with a *"
their uniform is silver and blue with a blue star on their helmet.
the only difference was the amount of memory.
it can carry 4 people including the pilot.
it was created in 1775 as a special service -- though it is part of the u.s.
the city is known for the alamo, and the river walk, which is a small river that flows through the middle of the city and is lined with shops and restaurants.
became the battle cry of the texans for the rest of the war.
there are many people called queen elizabeth.
they are known for having a high waistline and are usually thought to be worn by older or more conservative women.
so he had to do other things to gain a living.
he worked as an orthopedic surgeon, and later as the manager of a saw mill and glass factory.
now the city has its old name.
this name is from the river that flows through it.
the first mention of the city was in 1143.
there is a river that is also called chemnitz.
it lies between the stomach and the large intestine.
it is longer than the large intestine.
the history of writing songs is thousands of years old.
scholars believe that men and women may have created and sung songs even at the time of prehistory.
many modern bands have one or two members who write songs for the band.
there are many stories about agastya.
there are two older stories about agastya.
one story tells that he forced the vindhya mountains to bow down.
in the second story, he drank all the waters of the ocean.
these countries have a duty to help the icc.
only a few countries in asia have joined.
it can only open a case when national courts are not able to or don't want to.
there are 18 judges in the icc.
no two judges can come from the same country.
if he finds evidence that a person did something wrong, he asks the judges to start a trial.
it is a special form of reproduction, where only one parent is needed to make an identical copy of itself.
it is when a small part of a plant or animal break off and then, while they are separated from their "mother", they start to grow until both the "parent" and the "offspring" are the same size and both are capable of budding again.
this will happen many more times
trading between different countries also came down.
leaders of many countries thought over these matters and discussed them in meetings.
this is because they have given more money to imf by way of first subscriptions, and so have larger share of voting rights.
some are good and some are bad comments about the work of imf.
world bank group
the purpose was to help france to again build industry and other important things like roads destroyed during the second world war.
the member countries use the money received for any one of above or some other similar activity.
in general, the world bank group is part of the united nations system.
one of them is that two or three countries have more power to decide matters.
it is the main judicial organ or branch of the united nations.
since the year 2000 the docket went down from 23 to 12 cases.
a judge serves for nine year and may be re-elected.
generally, five members of the security council of the united nations always have a judge from their country.
it also uses the laws of the civilized world.
this battle became famous as the battle of plassey.
they did not give any respect to old royal houses of india like the mughals and the peshwas.
under this law, the government got many powers to arrest people and keep them in prisons without any trial.
the people called this act the black act.
the position was now clear to the leaders of the united kingdom.
this was the land where the kingdom of israel and the kingdom of judah had once been.
the state of israel covered more or less the same land.
many countries of the world did not recognize israel, but establish trading and other relations with it.
they immediately forced everyone out of the cities, effectively turning the whole country into a giant labor camp.
his parents liked his older brother more than louis and were upset when louis's brother died at ten.
louis and his family were caught in a small town outside of paris.
now they were in house arrest.
it is possible to go to the top of the tower.
it is said that the tower was built in 35 days and was dressed in 76 days.
there is a story about valmiki.
he also helped chelsea to win the same title the next year.
in fact few countries have such a person in their history.
bail is money given to the court to guarantee that someone will go to their trial.
if the person does not show up for their trial, the government gets to keep the money.
goodnight is something people say instead of goodbye if they are leaving each other in the evening or night.
usually the things that are traded are worth the same amount of money, but no money is used in the trade.
the problem with barter is one person may not want what the other person has.
this is where money becomes useful because anything can be traded for a set amount of money.
he also learned to play the trombone.
a second cousin once removed is your second cousin but one generation up (for example their parent).
pressure means how much something is pushing on something else
you can see the fourth tooth in the lower jaw of a crocodile when its mouth is closed.
the city made several plans and laws that were set up to slow the growth of the city and that led the city to be famous for its new ideas and connection to the environment.
the city is considered one of the 5 best cities to invest in in latin america
heat waves happen during winter and cold waves happen during summer are not uncommon.
the green area of the city is one of largest in brazil.
to go on the tour you must buy a ticket with five tickets that give you the right to get on and off bus four times.
the idea behind it is simple.
one such way could be to take a fingerprint of every person, another one could be to let the person sign a document.
the number of cycles per second of a system is its frequency.
it tells how often something happens.
they have to earn their "enchantix" by saving someone from their own "relm" when they are in trouble.
jesus christ is a fixture to this christian town and even the little chapel puts on a show for people to look at.
also it is the home of red kelly, who played in the nhl.
students from all over the county can attend this high school along with several others in the area.
as of 2006, the students can choose which high school to go instead of being forced to go to the closest.
he was from the labor party.
these three countries had formed asa in 1961.
it is named because all the countries in it are a part of southeast asia.
some other countries may soon join asean.
it worked using the force of magnetism.
some people also tell about another group of explosives.
it works in almost all countries of the world.
unicef has been working for over 60 years in different countries all over the world.
this border was part of the iron curtain.
the fall of the wall (1989).
a country has a free economy, when its government does not control the economic activities of its citizens and companies.
the second world war had just ended three years before in 1945.
the problems continued even after 10 years until the early 1980s.
the second half of the season should prove interesting.
arsaces is a word that appear between 3 and 4 times in the bible and has unknown meanings.
it is used often to split pieces of wood into smaller pieces.
the usual place where crews can be found are ships and airplanes.
they will report to that person.
the word can also be used to refer to sexual practices which are bad for the mind or body.
they are also quite liked in gardens.
tea can be made from the flowers.
this made it harder to make articles, and soon became overlooked by wikipedia, which anyone can edit.
some languages have more than one word for "the".
the tree is a new idea).
waterfront is the land by the side of a body of water (e.g.
these were not used in real life.
south korea is the first country in the world to put laws on robots.
the people who live in the city are known as "fortalezenses".
this event happens every year and lasts for three days.
when a country recognizes another country, it means that the first country believes that the second country is legal and has a right to be a country.
a househusband is a husband that chooses to stay at home instead of working at a career.
there is a public high school in the town where students aged 14 to 21 years of age study to earn their "ontario high school diploma".
on the outside of a pie there is a sweet or savory crust, and on the inside there is a filling.
there are many different kinds of pie.
people from different countries often have their own different type of pie.
sarcasm is different from lying because when a person is being sarcastic, the person listening is supposed to understand that the person speaking does not mean what they just said.
if someone says something sarcastic, it is usually said in a tone of voice that tells the person listening that they are being sarcastic, or the person listening knows the person talking well enough that they understand that the person talking is being sarcastic.
a lie is something that someone says that is not true.
people that are lying often want others to believe that the lie is truth.
people can have many reasons for lying, such as if they are hiding something, if they want something from you, or white lies.
sometimes a person will say something that is not true, but they do not know it is not true.
a rose has thorns on its stem.
they are members of the family "rosaceae".
a mud pie is a pie made of mud.
the whole pie is usually a disk of mud, although grass may be mixed in as well.
most mud pies are made by children who are playing with or in mud.
a tentacle is a part of the body of an animal that can move freely.
the other such form is the medusa.
the other form is the polyp.
people should see a doctor, for there have been deaths for being touched by a medusa.
hatred is a emotion that people feel when they do not like someone or something very much.
it can be as small as resentment, or can lead to murder.
most people accept that it happened in 1054.
this forced king james to run away from london.
their mother gave them a good education with the help of her husband’s library.
her husband became a state comptroller.
she did a fine role as the first lady.
this made standing difficult to greet guests.
most people having a heart attack experience chest pain.
a heart attack is a medical emergency that needs to be taken care of as quickly as possible.
his wife alice came from a family who had more money than the elgars, and she was 14 years older than him.
people have managed to work out who each friend was, but the meaning of the main tune is still a puzzle.
gerontius is an old man who is dying and thinking about whether god will punish him for his sins or save him and take him to heaven.
throughout his life his wife helped him by ruling neat manuscript lines on plain paper so that he could write his music.
it has the tune which is sung to the words “land of hope and glory” and the audience always join in singing it at the last night of the proms.
he could then move paper and ink over it, much like a stamp.
the letters would leave some ink on the paper.
a mezzo-soprano is a female singer whose voice is a little lower than that of a soprano but not low enough to be called a contralto.
old age is when a person is old and near the time when he or she dies.
these people are usually retired from work and spend their time in other ways like helping take care of small children who are kin to them in some way.
they will start to have many health problems, and take a lot of medicine.
the reason for this is that their bodies are slowly deteriorating, so they have more problems, especially with moving.
people who are of old age are also called elders.
elders are considered to be wise because they have had much experience in their long lives.
the crystal dome is a large glass crystal where the players must go in at the end.
small golden and silver tickets are blown around the dome and they must try and catch as many as they can.
if the team gets over 100 points, they win a big prize.
if they do not win, they get a small crystal to take home with them.
sometimes, a colony may not get full freedom, but may become part of other country or even the part of the country which colonized it.
these officials put him under house arrest.
he repeatedly tried to form a circle of leaders to support his policies.
many persons still believe that the situation still continues to be worse compared to earlier times.
all member countries must follow these rules.
if a person thinks that a european country has abused his or her human rights, that person may take the matter to the judges of ecohr.
the judges will listen to the complaint and give their decisions.
the number of judges are equal to the number of member countries of the council of europe.
at present, there are forty six member countries of the council of europe.
each country may have one judge in the ecohr.
there is a castle called sagan in the middle of an area that is also called sagan.
they are hydrozoa, and belong to the same order as the polyps.
most of the film is true but some parts are made up.
starr had played with them before when best could not be with them to play.
some of his customers were members of bands, looking for new music to play or to pass the time, and came often to the store.
among those bands were the early beatles.
he found out what he needed to know to get the record, so nems could sell copies.
it was said later that losing him was the beginning of the beatles breakup, which happened in 1970.
so when people want to measure something, they compare it to the length of the rod.
the tree is special in that there are no other trees that look like it.
some people say it is a living fossil.
if people do many different measurements, they will get many different results.
mean can also stand for expected value.
this is different to the median.
the value of the share depends on how many people want to buy it and how many people are selling it.
from that broker people can buy and sell stocks and shares by giving them all the information about corporations and its situation in the market as a whole.
there were problems in the country, such as prejudice and intolerance, that needed to be spoken about.
he grew up in the jewish faith, but later became a buddhist.
door gods can be seen on temples - places of religion - and other buildings.
there is a belief that door gods stop evil spirits from going into the building.
door gods are often in pairs, one for each side of the door.
they showed his two best soldiers.
he tried to talk kerouac out of becoming a writer, because he knew it was hard to succeed in such a career.
kerouac did his best to earn enough money to pay for both his and his mother's living, but his mother also had to work.
he wanted to give an idea of how the people he met thought things through, and expressed this to each other, along with telling what they did and said.
he also knew he needed more experiences, to tell a better story.
kerouac denied he was the father at first, but a blood test later proved it was likely.
she also grew to look like him, and he accepted her as his child.
ginsberg mentioned his friends in some of his works, including kerouac, and wanted the people who liked him to give them and their writings a chance.
some people wanted to blame him for doing bad things, or getting others to do them.
other people wanted to do those kinds of things with kerouac.
he became almost a recluse in the house he bought for his mother.
he also began to abuse alcohol.
even though he liked some of what he inspired, he felt that the public largely got the wrong message from his books.
he was buried in his hometown, and was hardly remembered there at first.
it was years before his grave received a headstone.
cassady earned most of his money from labor, and was often out of work and owed money.
he spent a long time in jail after he was arrested for selling marijuana.
many people see him as one of the greatest of russian writers.
he returned from the war after many years.
she married him many years after this meeting.
when her husband became the president, she acted as the first lady of the united states.
she met the young ben when he was a student at miami university.
when her husband became the president, she gave special attention to the social life at the white house.
the book tells about her work and life.
after the death of her husband.
she died on 22 may 1943.
his brother asked her to take up the role of the first lady.
she died at the age of 75 in albany.
there their first child ruth was born.
she was the third child of her parents.
she gave dance lessons to earn money during the great depression.
but the marriage did not last long.
she also traveled outside the usa.
the family moved into the white house.
she was not very much interested in her role as the first lady.
she did not suffer any injury.
he could not remain alive and died after about three months.
while her husband devoted time to his work and career, ida devoted time to her home and husband.
the second daughter dies in august.
their first daughter also died in 1876.
he them became a governor of ohio.
he always paid his attention to his wife and cared for her.
she sat by the side of her husband during official dinners.
at that time, very few people know of her bad physical condition.
only in recent years, people came to know of her bad physical condition.
her younger sister cared for her.
the marriage took place in 1885, as she did not immediately wanted to leave her father alone.
she kept her younger brother with them.
she spent most of her time painting.
this brought their bad living condition to the attention of the congressmen.
she also told her physician to tell her husband to marry again after her death.
her husband had suffered a long illness.
there were many things which the president was needed to do which he could not do.
the child only lived for a few days.
the problem birth made her unable to have any more children.
the business continued to earn money.
it talked of the couple while they were seeing a play in a theater before their marriage.
still a few copies could not be called back.
these copies are now very wanted items.
she began her role as the first lady.
she took over many common duties of the government and helped her husband in many official matters.
at the same time, she sent many other official matters to the heads of departments or allowed them to remain them undone.
in this book, she said that her husband’s doctors had asked her to take up many responsibilities of her husband.
she continued to live in washington.
some people say that she liked and admired younger men.
she did a course in music.
he gave her son to her parents to raise him.
after the death of her husband, she tried to make a new life for her.
she spent her first ten years of her life at iowa.
she became a very good horsewoman.
she lived with him, but sometimes spent time with her two sons in california.
she started her role as the first lady.
she did it very well all through the term of her husband as the president.
she died of a heart attack.
she had helped many boys and girls to get education.
she became a new role model for first lady.
two brothers followed young anna roosevelt.
he was a student at harvard.
it was near their main house.
he also accused her of anti-catholicism.
in 1968 she received the united nations prize in the field of human rights.
their life was like any other family of army officers – moving from one place to another.
they lived in many places in the united states.
it was the first home they had ever bought.
many leaders from different countries came to the white house.
they received a very good welcome.
her grave lies by the side of her husband’s grave in a small chapel.
she was the oldest first lady alive until her death.
no one else has had this protection as long as her.
but her father had got baptized as a catholic, and perhaps returned to it shortly before her death.
she took over all the household duties for her father and two older brothers.
she had a will to continue her education.
the two became known to each other at a acting group.
they also acted together in a play.
on a trip to venezuela, some people threw stones at their car and spat on the car.
they started a tradition of inviting families to sunday church services in the east room of the white house.
in short, separation of church and the state says that religion and the government should remain separate from each other.
she did not appear in public often.
her husband and daughters were by her side.
her husband died about ten months later.
this name confusion had created problems for nancy.
anyone with his or her name in the hollywood blacklist was unable to get any work in any movie.
she also worked with many groups working for charity.
he did not find this very useful.
the book became very famous and sold many copies.
she spent much of her time caring for her husband who was suffering from alzheimer's disease.
in other words, furniture are all the things that are in the house and that people can use to sit, to lie on or that are supposed to contain smaller things like cloths or cups.
rhythm is a word that refers to the length of each note in a piece of music.
a tune is made up of lots of notes.
some of the notes are longer than others.
when we write the music down we put each group in bars (or “measures”).
the first beat of the bar feels stronger than the others.
one has to learn to let the music “breathe” in the right way.
something that is necessary is a necessity.
the person who gets the property and other things when someone dies is called the heir.
a metronome is a small object that can be used by people who are practising instruments to help them to play in time.
it has to be wound up after a few minutes of ticking.
there is a weight on the pendulum which can be slid up or down and set to a particular speed.
there are numbers on the metronome to which you can set it.
a number of buildings were built for the rallies, some of which were not finished.
because the businesses make very much money, the people who own and work for the businesses seem to want the country to be at war because they make more money that way.
an organization is a group of people who are doing something together in an organized way.
remains of those walls can still be seen today (notably the "helpoort" is one the few still standing city ports).
the city can easily be reached.
crete is the greatest of the greek islands.
during world war ii almost all of the old city was destroyed.
the houses were built again after the war.
mannheim is now an important city because of its business power and culture.
after the second world war the city was called bremerhaven.
he later changed his name to "praetorius".
there praetorius worked for a prince and wrote church songs and books of religion in the year 1597.
fight against the chase of witches.
some women were accused to be witches.
so these women were arrested and put in prison.
he believed that man can do either good or bad things.
those things can be good or bad.
this however, does not give human courts a right to put those to death, they believe are guilty of the crime of witchcraft.
the name changed again to "keane".
he also writes the songs for the band.
this because he had to play classic music and he thought it was boring.
he comes from battle in east sussex.
somewhere only we know
the single was very popular in the united kingdom and world wide.
each time it had a different b-side.
this is a place where the band used to spent their days.
under the iron sea
this is a list of songs of keane.
the songs are divided for easy consult.
these old songs were written by keane.
a b-side is a song included with a single on its cd.
these songs were written by other artists.
to the end of the earth.
official sheet music for the song is found in the wise publication's book of "hopes and fears".
there are about 2000 people living on langeoog.
people on the island use bikes.
a shirt is a kind of cloth which is made to cover the chest.
it is always a part of a shirt or another kind of clothing.
people who want to go somewhere pay the taxi driver to take them where they want to go.
it is famous for claiming to be the smallest client ever made.
it is shareware, meaning that you get to use it for 30 days, then have to pay money to continue using it.
certificate of deposit
the person who wanted the cd—the consumer—agrees to give the money to the bank for that period of time and may not take the money back until the time has expired.
if the consumer takes the money back before the agreed amount of time, they will have to pay a penalty fee.
it closed after several years of success.
he died on march 18 1745.
the name of that province is friesland.
thousands of people lost their homes.
he lived the last 18 months of his life here.
if necessary they can run at up to 50 h (30 mph) for some distance at a time.
the male and female live in the same territory and raise their children together.
kiwis become mature when they are 2 years old, and they can live to over 20 years old.
it used to live on the island of mauritius before it became extinct.
a prisoner can also be a person who was captured by the enemy in a battle.
it may or may not have a stem and sometimes has many caps growing from one stem.
the lowest note is middle c and it has a range of 3 octaves.
there is also an alto flute which sounds a fifth lower than the ordinary flute.
the flute is played by blowing across the top of the mouthpiece.
it is like blowing across the top of an empty bottle.
it is like blowing through a drinking straw.
this is why the saxophone cannot be called a brass instrument, although it is made of brass.
it was about a man who was married to a witch.
he is ridiculed for his big ears, but in fact he is capable of flying by using them as wings.
he is an elephant who has huge ears and is able to fly, using his magic feather.
she becomes angry when the boys pick on him.
the main story has to do with dumbo and his new friends getting separated from the rest of the circus as they wonder into the big city.
the story was supposed to be as if the first dumbo ended and this one started the next day.
he had to take a break in his studies because he had to join the army.
many of his friends were communists, but he never joined the kpd.
for the next five years he lived in denmark.
he gave a statement and said that he had never been a member of the communist party.
he then flew back to switzerland - the only place he could go to at the time.
from that point on he got more and more isolated.
she tried to get him free.
he was made a member of the house of lords after he retired, and became the first "earl attlee".
these two are joined at the bottom by a u-shaped piece called the ‘boot’.
the bassoon has one of the largest note ranges, going from low b flat to a high f on the top line of the treble clef.
they are usually made with the bell pointing downwards.
an octave is the distance between two musical notes that have the same letter name.
there is enough food in each egg to last 21 days.
most famous sight of the town is the beautiful town hall.
was later turned into a musical.
it can also be an item worn on the foot to help people swim more easily.
they are usually found in forests but some can also be found in fields.
a stone fruit is a fruit with one large seed inside.
these seeds can be called pits.
it can be found in every ocean.
the male whale is known to sing for up to 22 hours at a time.
every male has a different song, which he uses to call a female or scare away other males.
the songs are made up of a pattern of low notes repeated over a period of hours or days.
there are also different cases which show the meaning of a word in a sentence.
use the familiar form when talking to a child, and the polite form when talking to an adult.
a competition or contest is an event where people get together to see who is the best at something.
the person who wins may get a prize.
in things like music there will be an adjudicator who will decide which person they think is the best.
they can do whatever they want to their city.
it can be build it up from the ground or it can be destroyed by a hurricane or a ufo
power plants make power so the city can have electricity.
by building power lines, power is connected to the different areas of the city.
doorstops that keep the door from hitting a wall can be put on the door, or on the wall, or on the floor in front of the wall.
it is often used for music and movies.
this means the authors of the work can say how their work should be copied.
people usually buy copies from the author or publisher.
it takes away the ability to use parts of the work in a new creation, which they may be allowed to do.
some people believe that people can always find a way to break drm.
most often it is called concrete.
when people are dehydrated, they have lost so much water in their body that their bodies no longer work in the right way.
an object that is individual is for only one person or thing (not shared by a group).
something that is individual can also be different from anyone else (unique).
these bright colors are to warn animals that may want to eat it that it is venomous.
their thorns serve to protect them from predators.
stepping on them is quite painful but not dangerous.
people think it is an aphrodisiac.
both parts are more or less symmetrical.
card can also mean a flat board that holds parts for a computer.
it is used to carry drinks, and can be used as a side table.
it is also part of the body for many male animals.
there are two of these ducts.
during breaks, he traveled and saw how poor some people were in argentina.
he started to think that only fighting could solve this.
his body was not found until the year 1997.
it is like both the other types.
the first glues may have been natural liquids that come out of trees when they are cut.
a big city on the river is irkutsk.
it belongs to the greatest river system that flows into the arctic ocean.
the area is very hard to watch by the police.
there are four generations of that car.
eddie is most often shown as a dead body that has come back to life and looks very evil.
some of these albums are killers, the number of the beast and seventh son of a seventh son.
iron maiden started off in bars but started to get pretty famous
it is also the largest city in that country.
the city became the most important settlement in the area when romans ruled slovenia.
it is in the country of south africa.
it is near the town of agulhas.
holy roman emperor
holy roman emperor was the title that was given to the ruler of a loose group of places in what is now called germany called the holy roman empire.
he has been on the show since he was born.
he was the one out of six unwanted babies to be in the show.
he does not realise until later that the town he is living in is made-up.
he is in charge of making everything go right and cannot afford to lose truman.
they also have boxer engines, which means that the pistons and the cylinders in the engine fire left to right instead of up and down or at an angle.
they can go without water for weeks.
when the female is close to giving birth, it leaves the group for a time to give birth to its offspring, and comes back 2-3 weeks after her baby is born.
after a pregnancy of 14-15 months the female gives birth to usually a single baby (which is called "calf").
young giraffes become mature when they are 4 years old, and they are fully grown when they are 6 years old.
perhaps they even catch live fish.
they are either put on the floor, or on a wall of a building.
it is impossible to make on a flat surface, called a plane because the sides would be the same, but possible to make on a sphere.
it can be made by picking two places on a great circle and connecting them.
it became a city in 1972.
waste is usually buried in landfills.
they have a bad smell and look bad, so they are usually made far from where people live.
it is where feces is stored before coming out of the anus.
he helped to save many lives of jews of hungary from death.
its name comes from the name of the town where it stood, "oświęcim".
guards caught the families of the prisoners who escaped or tried to escape.
they showed the family members to other prisoners to prevent any escape attempts.
they kept four people in such a room standing all night, and forced them to work during the day.
in some other rooms, the ss officers kept people and did not give them any water or food.
these people were left to die of hunger.
they kept people there and they died as the room’s air became without oxygen.
they also hanged people in a way that their shoulder joints got broken.
they also hanged some persons and they died a slow and painful death.
he did things like castration without using any anesthetics.
many women and men died during these experiments.
these groups helped some prisoners to escape from auschwitz.
they had forced march more than 58,000 prisoners on a death march to germany.
the debate still continues about the steps, which could have been taken to save the killings of the prisoners by the ss.
they left behind only those who could not march.
little is known about the number of people who died at auschwitz and other camps.
it is thought to be a large number.
the people later on scattered the ashes of the victims between the huts.
finally people removed all of them.
when the jewish group protested saying that most of the killed were jewish people, 300 smaller crosses appeared by 1998.
finally, people removed the smaller crosses but the larger one continues to stand.
he was always interested in drawing.
the building that is now the royal opera house is the third building in that place.
together with the new restaurant areas it has helped to get more young people to come.
the temple is one of the five such temples of shiva in south india.
he took out his eyes and offered the same to the linga.
he belonged to a family of leather workers.
some of the rishis were famous for becoming angry very quickly and easily.
many young men from villages and towns also lived with them as their students and disciples.
sometimes, even kings and other members of the ruling families would go to them to seek advice and blessings.
the temple is one of the five such temples of shiva in south india.
the other four such temples are at
both wanted to become priests of big royal families of ancient india.
he was also a philosopher and an artist.
he wrote his first poem when he was only eight years old.
they visited many places in india.
he also read works of kalidasa.
he wanted to become a barrister.
his bride was just a girl of ten years.
but four of their children died before reaching full adulthood.
he saw the poor people very closely.
he planted many trees and also built a beautiful garden.
he was also an expert painter.
these songs are now a part of present day culture of bengali people.
many people did not like his thinking.
they did not kill him as they started arguing with tagore, and then dropped the idea to kill him.
he also had a dream for the future india.
they now also include descendants of tamil speaking people even when they no longer speak tamil language.
sometimes they perform such a dance before the village goddess called mariamma.
these stories may be religious stories or on any other topic.
by moving the stick he would try to defend against attack by several persons.
it comes from a problem with the genes.
children who have this condition take more time to learn new things.
babies with down syndrome can be identified at birth because they look a little different from other babies.
the occitan language took a different path from latin than any of the official languages in the countries mentioned above.
there is animal plankton and plant also
during this period of his life he was well received by the islamic clerics of the time.
this proved and continues to be very controversial, as traditional islamic thought holds that jesus is the messiah, who himself will return in the flesh at the end of times.
if something can be used as a medicine, it is called a pharmaceutical.
a person who works in the study of pharmacology is called a pharmacologist.
to study chemicals, a person needs to know a lot about what will be affected if it is ingested.
most over-the-counter medication will not hurt a person if they take a bit more than they are meant to.
today they are spoken all over the world, often because of colonization.
oil can be found near the north and west coast of this gulf.
it can also be caused by chemical or physical damage done to the lungs.
people of all ages can have pneumonia.
but the select few that can survive within the human body are known as the true pathogens
air is moved from the outside through the respiratory system into the lungs.
it is usually done by people which have a special training in it.
it is also often used to tell stories with the help of dance and mime.
the feet should make as straight a line as possible.
the feet are as close together as possible.
with this he could do without a spark.
it has been a city since 1541.
there are three villages on the island.
she is also ireland's second woman president, and the first in the world to succeed another woman.
when two people do not want to be married anymore, they can ask the government to be separated.
if there are children, the children may also feel sad when the parents are divorced.
an example for an alphabetic writing system is the latin alphabet, which is used in large parts of the world.
migration is when animals leave a place which has no more food, usually because of the winter season.
taking back sunday
the original sin refers to adam and eve in the religious book the bible, who broke god's order not to eat the forbidden fruit because they doubted god and were persuaded by the snake to eat it.
there are two different kinds of romanization.
he wrote several books that he hoped would change the world.
he attacked most of the moral ideas that were popular at the time because he did not believe that there are any real facts about what is right or wrong.
he believed that the christian idea that one should feel pity when one sees weakness was unhelpful.
he thought that people should be very aware of their body and of the real world in which they actually live.
this idea is that everyone and everything is trying to overcome itself, or defeat or take control from itself.
the death of god
however, what he wrote later in his life became more and more odd.
some people see a problem in this.
there has always a big military force in brasschaat.
now most of them are closed or are used to train the soldiers.
they have long black tongues, which are long enough to wash their eyes and ears.
after 420 to 450 days of pregnancy the mother gives birth to one baby, which drinks milk for up to 6 months.
both animals have long necks and legs and long blue tongues.
a military camp is a training area for soldiers who seek to join the army.
a person military camp starts out as a recruit and ends up working in the army as a private.
kepler used three laws to say what form the path has and how fast the planet moves.
some women are also born without a hymen.
the hymen was also used as a way of checking whether or not a wife had not had sexual intercourse with other men.
there are many more animals which have hymens, but not all are listed here.
this is because the mother is giving the baby hormones through breast feeding which keeps it thick.
it is named after a wharf that was built there in 1297.
it lies on the river thames.
this can be treated by a doctor with antibiotics.
very often this is a hormone.
the city is on the black sea.
other humans do it as a sport.
many places have laws that limit hunting.
2b is the length of the 2 ends of the short side.
many people from india consider him to have been a great emperor.
he returned three years later and took control of the city samarkand.
he had only about twelve thousand men with him but he had been promised help by daulat khan, the governor of punjab.
the two armies met at a place called panipat, a small village near delhi.
after the battle about fifteen thousand men of the enemy were killed including their commander ibrahim lodi.
there are many such groups of words.
they thought that by doing so they would get the blessings of the gods and other beings.
all quiet on the western front
it is about a german soldier named paul bäumer as he fights together with his classmates in world war i. troops are changed every couple of weeks; they are either sent to the front line or a few miles back.
this is so he can go into critical care with his friends.
the food bad and the men must keep going to the bathroom.
the americans have joined the war and are pushing back all of the ground that the germans gained.
they can only can be found in and around the city of vinh.
it has over 1,100,000 people living in the city as of the year 2007.
it is on the border with belgium.
looking up something will take only one step more.
the word in the middle of the dictionary will be either before or after the term than needs to be looked up, if the words do not match.
if it is after the word, it needs to be in the first half.
there are problems that grow very fast.
the latin word has a number of meanings, but the most common one is border.
the city existed before the roman empire.
the order in which those things can be derermined, and has a meaning as well.
during world war ii, māori soldiers were famous as brave warriors because they won many difficult battles and stayed strong in the face of danger.
this means it can be spread by having sex.
since it is caused by a bacterium, it can be treated with antibiotics.
it is a very large family of fish made up of more than 2500 species.
what happened next is what is known as the battle of hastings.
many of the english soldiers ran away then, as they were not trained soldiers, but farmers because most of his trained soldiers deserted him because all the high ranking men got to have all the treasures of war, money and praise.
humans might have started to count on a base 12 because there are approximately 12 cycles of the moon in one cycle of the sun.
it is a source of many vitamins.
the story is about a mermaid who falls in love with a prince.
they said he was a girl and pulled down his trousers to check.
when he was 14 he went to copenhagen so that he could become an actor.
but soon he stopped doing this and became an author.
he got hurt after falling out of bed in 1872.
it is home to the club fenerbahce.
it can be found on both sides of the atlantic.
they are between malta and tunisia.
a native speaker is someone who speaks a language as his or her first language or mother tongue.
native speakers can usually speak the language very well since they speak the language since they were born.
she helped a lot of wounded soldiers during the crimean war to get better.
it tells the story of an army captain who is sent on a boat deep into the jungle to capture a special forces colonel who has gone insane.
one at the bottom and one at the top.
it is used a lot in areas where there are a lot of mountains.
castration is an operation in which the sex organ which will make a boy become a man is removed.
when the boy grows up he will not be able to have children.
he will continue to have a high voice for the rest of his life.
the reason why parents let their children be castrated was probably the same as the reason that parents in some parts of the world still sell their children today: they are desperately poor and people promise them that this is a way to give their child a brilliant future.
once a boy was castrated he would go to a special music school where children learned singing and musical instruments.
they were fussed over and kept warm to stop them from getting colds.
it is impossible now for us to know what these great castrato voices sounded like, but they must have had very powerful voices and many of the singers were very skilled in singing and adding musical ornamentation to the songs.
the most famous one was called farinelli.
there is a recording of his voice made in 1902 which can be heard online, but he may not have been a good singer and he was old when he made the recording, so we cannot judge whether the castrato voice was beautiful by that recording.
women can also use falsetto, but when they do there isn't as big of a change in sound from their normal voices as there is in men.
when women use falsetto the voice sounds lighter or weaker than it does when they speak or sing normally.
falsetto singing was used in the days when women were not allowed to sing in churches.
in both cases it makes the characters more dramatic, but the first is very serious while the second is supposed to be humorous.
often it is called boy soprano, but since there are also many girls who sing in cathedral and church choirs these days, the word treble is now used to describe the voice of either sex.
they often start this training aged 7 or 8, and they may only have four or five years before their voice starts to break.
someone who liked one of the singers and wanted them to have lots of applause would pay a group of people to sit near the back of the opera house and to clap and shout enthusiastically whenever that singer had finished a song.
it usually lasts maximum up to one month if it is not treated.
it is south east of melbourne.
the first races were held in 1867.
there is a cranbourne cup race meeting every year as well as other carnivals.
later in the same year most of the city joined with the city of berwick to form the city of casey.
the number of people living in cranbourne has grown quickly since the 1970s.
this can be done by placing words and pictures in ways that will get the attention of others.
"genocide" means trying to destroy a group which is or is similar to an ethnic group or a religious group by killing its members.
but the soldiers would not let them come.
a lot of victims are starting to forgive the killers, and it is widely said that the first step to preventing it from happening again is forgiveness instead of vengeance.
it has a rather large fin on its back for its size.
they live alone or in small groups, usually of about three, but sometimes they live in groups of up to ten.
the zygote grows inside the egg until it is ready and the baby animal "hatches".
when it is older it will turn into a pupa and turn into a butterfly.
they are from the family "trochilidae".
he threw them out because he believed they were taking the jobs of ugandans.
the last king was jie who was said to be cruel and greedy.
it is not politically correct in many of the things it shows, and is not made for children.
these boys are 8 and 9 years old.
he is often the main reason for the plot of each episode.
he has since been used almost as regularly as the main 4 boys.
these families are important because their children have been the main character.
like most adults in south park, he has a tendency to get caught up in any trend.
the colon is a part of the large intestine.
a country that is ruled by a dictator has never been a democracy.
a country that is ruled by a dictator is called a dictatorship.
it is not always clear whether a leader is a dictator or not.
it has more people than any other country in africa.
nigeria is known for its corruption, where the government workers take a lot of money that was supposed to be used to pay for things like road-building.
nigeria produces a large amount of oil, and some fighting has been going on because many people want a share of the oil profits.
this fighting has been happening in the area called the niger delta, where the niger river flows into the atlantic ocean.
one thing that makes it particularly difficult for many foreigners to learn is that khmer words are not separated in a sentence.
he had the support of the united states until the end of the cold war.
the united gave less support to mobutu because he was no longer useful in the cold war.
some people call the war africa's world war because it involved so many countries.
more than one hundred thousand people live there.
people who cannot make insulin in their bodies, or who make it but their body cannot use it properly, have the disease diabetes.
some people with diabetes can take in insulin from outside their bodies instead of producing their own insulin.
very often they grow larger than rabbits.
the essec is an important school teaching business to adults in france.
because of the south location, there is a strong wind from the west.
performing music from memory means knowing a piece of music well enough to be able to play or sing it without the written music.
although some people can learn music by ear, most people who are taught to play musical instruments learn new pieces by reading the printed music which is in front of them on a music stand.
when someone has learned to play a piece of music well enough to perform it, it is good if they can learn to play it without the printed music.
one of them kept going wrong in the same place, playing something that had happened earlier, so that they played the middle bit three times before eventually managing to finish the piece.
people who learn musical instruments should try to memorize some of their pieces.
a grave is where somebody or something is buried after they have died.
the name will be on the grave of the dead person.
there are different rooms you can build.
it says that it is possible to find two twin primes that are as big as wanted.
for example 3 and 5 are both prime and differ by two.
to use the system, one had to put one's face close to the system so that each eye could see only one screen.
ways of thinking about life and ways of thinking about how people understand life is called philosophy.
existentialism is a way of thinking that is very different from many other ways of thinking.
this means that the only nature we as humans have is the nature we make for ourselves.
as a result of this existentialists think that the actions or choices that a person make are very important.
they believe that each person has to decide for themselves what is right and wrong, and what is good and bad.
king of the hill
king of the hill on retrojunk
they are very powerful and fast and can swim at speeds up to 50 mph.
it later came to mean the business where such drinks are served, such as a pub or nightclub.
very often, such land areas are called "cape", and the water areas also may be called "gulf".
headlands are made of hard rock and bays are made of soft rock and it takes the hard rock longer to erode.
a bay is a recess or inlet in the shore of a sea or lake between two headlands.
glaciers will only form in places that are cold enough and get enough snow over time.
they do this because they are very big and heavy, so they erode mountains and land when they move and scratch the rock they sit on.
blue is the color of light that has the most energy, so blue is the only color of light that can escape without being absorbed.
it is important to be able to read music well in order to sight-read.
people who find it hard to read music will find it hard to sight-read.
people who play in orchestras will need to be good sight-readers because they often have to play music that they have never seen or heard before.
playing through lots of easy music is a good way to improve.
when someone is reading aloud their eyes are looking several words ahead of the word they are speaking.
in the same way a good sight-reader will try to look ahead of the notes he is playing.
in this way he can try to make the music expressive, even if it means leaving out some of the notes.
a good sight-reader will be able to see the printed music and imagine what the notes should sound like.
in this way he will not need to keep looking at his fingers to check whether he is playing the correct notes.
a child prodigy is a child who is very smart at an early age.
they can do things that average people can only do when they are adults.
he just grew up to be a good musician.
there may have been many other child prodigies who never became clever adults at all, or who died before they could become famous.
sometimes their childhoods are very difficult because people expect so much of them.
it is said that when he was three he saw a mistake his father had made when adding up the wage bills.
it is most often treated with anticoagulants, making it so the blood can no longer clot.
in other places it may be called the toilet or the wc.
are a form of street furniture.
the bundle of nerves near the base of the tail that controlled reflexes in the back of the body was actually larger than the brain.
the back legs each had three short toes, while the front legs had five toes.
sometimes a second part was added.
most people who study the history of music believe that kings such as charlemagne brought music from rome to their kingdoms in france and germany.
the "office" is the part of the roman rite where holy men and women pray at special times every day.
people who study the history of music and religion no longer believe this, because most early christian songs were not from the psalms, and jews did not sing psalms for many centuries after their most important holy place, the second temple, was destroyed in the year 70.
these neumes do not show the exact rhythms, so that we cannot always be sure of the way they were sung.
women only sang in convents, and even then they could not sing in all the services.
but doctors are not giving up on finding some way to cure lupus.
it is therefore different from a language such as english which uses an alphabet in which most of the letters stand for one bit of sound (phoneme).
this would be used in books for young children, or for students starting to learn japanese, or when writing the lyrics for songs underneath the music where it is important to show how the words fit the music.
however, for someone who is about to visit japan and just wants to be able to recognize a few words, katakana will be more useful as it will help to read many of the road signs, shop names and the names of things on restaurant menus.
many scientists have tried to understand why the rules are different in deep space.
one idea is that we do not really understand gravity as well as we think we do.
so the idea is that there is more matter in the universe than we thought.
this is called dark matter because we know nothing about it, and because so far we cannot find it.
because dark matter does not seem to give off light, x-rays, or any other radiation, the instruments which can find normal matter are unable to find dark matter.
it seems that dark matter is not made of the same thing as the matter we see everyday on earth.
they observed two galaxies placed in such a position that normal matter would be stuck behind while dark matter would not, and by measuring gravity they were able to detect what they say is two clouds of two different kinds of matter.
katakana is the way that some of the words are written in japanese.
in most words each letter stands for a bit of sound (a phoneme).
katakana is used to write words which have been borrowed from other languages, or to write foreign names and names of countries.
it is not always easy for us to recognize these words because the japanese language does not have some of the sounds that we do in english.
sometimes it is impossible to show the difference between two foreign words, e.g.
sometimes sentences in books or cartoons may be written in katakana to show that someone is supposed to be speaking with a foreign accent.
it is used to care for hair or other fibers.
nowadays catapults are used to study old weapons and by people that want to experience older war methods.
the rest of the body looks like a part of a lion.
it often looked after a treasure.
they teach that a man needs more than one wife to be able to get to heaven.
they acted because of a phone call from the ranch- it looks like a 16 year old girl called the police to report she had been raped.
it looks like the call was made by a woman in her thirties, who gave a false identity.
each kingdom is split into phyla.
kingdom is the king in the mneomic, or a saying to help a person remember something, king phillip came over for great spaghetti.
each class is split into orders.
each order is split into families.
there are many orders in each class.
it then enters the large intestine.
water is taken away from it.
the food that is left is called feces.
sight is one of the senses.
having sight means to be able to see.
seeing gives animals knowledge of the world.
light from the world around the animal carries this knowledge in colors and pictures of shapes.
from that and from memory it can tell of what kind the object is.
for example, it can can tell how far away an object is.
it comes after the mouth and before the esophagus.
food and air go through the pharynx.
the ancient greeks noticed at death that this part of the intestine was always empty of food.
she wrote many books for children.
she had a son named lars.
there are often pictures of red deer found from this area of spain.
it is on a hill in the valley of the aterno river.
it is a very old town, full of beautiful buildings and churches.
he told the people of 99 villages to move in the new town.
it became soon the second city of the kingdom of naples.
that is also why the number 99 is so important in the history of l'aquila.
the city was an important market for the countryside.
after a few years l'aquila became an important point of communication between cities in and out of the kingdom.
an earthquake struck it in 1349.
cryptozoology is the study of animals that people think might exist, but for which it cannot be completely proved.
it also is the study of animals many scientists think are extinct, but which are still sometimes reported.
people who have seen it say it is like a red, fat worm around 2 - 4 feet long.
these people also say the creature spits yellow poison that will kill you as soon as it touches you and it can produce electricity so powerful that it could kill large animals.
sex education is telling people about sexual intercourse.
this usually includes things like how to make babies, how to protect against unwanted pregnancies, and how not to get any of the sexually transmitted diseases there are.
in many cultures speaking about sex or sexual education is a taboo.
he was the ruler of tibet before he was forced to leave the country when the chinese army took over.
some of them have been because there are people who believe tibet should not be a part of china.
this situation has led to some violence against people from outside tibet.
the only way for the air to go was by pushing the pellet out.
in many countries there are strict rules that limit the sales of air guns so not everyone can have one.
they are not as powerful as other guns but they can still kill people.
the dead body may be of an animal or a person.
it is often used in trigonometry.
the blackmailer might, for example, say that if the criminal does not give them a large amount of money they will tell the police.
it may be something about a sexual relation they are having that they do not want everyone to know about.
they might threaten to harm that business in some way unless money is paid.
the money that is offered is called a bribe and the verb is to bribe.
it is sometimes difficult to decide whether something is a bribe or just a reward.
if a father pays his son for washing the car, this is just a reward or payment.
but if a parent pays a child for eating up its dinner this might be thought of as a bribe, because most people would think this was not right.
bribery is usually about more serious cases in which a person offers money so that he does not get into trouble.
if someone wants to take something into a country that they are not allowed to take in (or that they would have to pay tax on) they might offer the customs officer a bribe to persuade him to let them through.
however in some parts of the world bribery is normal and it is difficult to do anything without offering bribes.
bribery in some form is quite common in business in many parts of the world.
giving business people presents in the hope that they will want to do business with you may just seem like good manners at times, but in some cases it may seem more like bribery.
people who are found to be taking bribes can sometimes lose their jobs.
then these doctors specialize by training for 3 or 4 years in psychiatry.
this is because of laws made by government that say only medical doctors can prescribe.
sometimes a disease in the body causes the brain to work wrong.
the patient will usually continue to see the psychologist.
he believed that human behavior was not all caused by the brain, but by things that happened to people when they were babies and young children.
this field of medicine is called neuropsychiatry.
in the meantime, they try to find ways to help by finding better medications.
psychologists apply this what is found to make new ways of helping people change how they behave.
he likes to ask his guests very embarrassing questions that make it seem that he is a serious far right-wing conservative who is also not very smart.
many famous american politicians and people in the news media agree to appear on his show because it is very popular.
his singing is known for his fast rapping, but in the more recent albums he has leaned toward singing.
he ended up playing the show and left quickly for a plane back to the usa.
he later took the album off the shelves as he did not feel comfortable with it being sold.
below is a list of equipment that john has used through the years.
this is often thought of as the end of the western roman empire.
it is the seat of a university, and is one of the most important industrial towns of umbria.
she is most famous for writing to kill a mockingbird.
she was friends with truman capote, and has been in hiding since her book to kill a mockingbird.
he became good friends with the man accused of the murder.
the story is about a man named steve who goes away for 40 days and 40 nights (like jesus).
when he comes back he is convinced he is the son of god but nobody believes him.
he turns day into night and everyone believes him then.
he finds from his friend july that the third message is her writings and one of her writings demands that he dies.
there is only one street of houses in dull, on the north side of the valley of the river tay.
a person may feel erotic when they see or touch or smell, or hear someone that they love in a sexual way.
they may also have erotic feelings about a person that they do not love, but who is sexually attractive to them.
some things are designed and made especially to make people feel erotic.
some people think that maybe these people never really believed this, but that it was an excuse to dance at a time when the church said that dancing was not allowed.
fermo is a town that sits on a hill only a few miles form the adriatic coast.
ban can also be made on products.
they usually knock the door down with a search warrant.
they are flat and push themselves through water by moving their bodies up and down in a wave motion.
some stingrays are smaller than your hand and some are as big as an adult man.
a stingray cut causes pain for humans but death is very rare.
their eyes are on top of its body so they cannot see their food.
then they use their strong teeth to smash the shells of the animals to get to the meat inside.
they give birth to baby stingrays.
lady stingrays give birth once a year to two to ten babies(1).
stingrays sometimes get little animals stuck on them and this can make them sick.
a little fish helps the stingrays by eating the little animals that get stuck on them for its supper.
their flat bodies let them hide in sand or mud.
their sharp tail can keep them safe from many animals.
when they are scared they usually swim away.
he could play extremely difficult music and had very large hands so that he could play chords with large stretches.
his family were important people who had been in the service of the tsars of russia.
while he was still a student he wrote a short opera called "aleko".
he used to get fed up with people asking him to play the piece.
this worried him a lot and he felt homesick.
he did not write very much music during the rest of his life in the united states.
people want them for their meat.
this lets the blood out and keeps the meat white.
while she sat in a seat at the front of a bus, the bus driver told her to move to the back of the bus so a white passenger could take the seat in the front of the bus.
she was tired of being treated as a lower class person because of the color of her skin.
after that, black people could sit wherever they wanted to on the bus.
her refusing to let others treat her differently was an important symbol in the fight for equal rights.
she did not let the color of her skin get in the way of her rights as a human being.
some say this is because it is simple, and others because it uses many basic mathematical elements.
a worker is a person who works.
she was brought up under christianity.
she began to be home schooled.
michalka has been singing since her sister was able to speak and sing.
phil of the future
guide dogs are dogs trained to help blind people live on their own.
both the dog and the handler must take special training to learn how to work as a team.
the handler needs to let the guide dog know the direction they want to go.
the dog can lead the person around things that may be dangerous, such as moving cars or other things.
because dogs cannot see colors as well as people, they cannot read traffic signals, so the handler must use ways to tell if it is safe to cross a street.
because the guide dog and handler will be in public, it is important that the dog stays calm in busy or loud areas.
they are a sweet food and should not be eaten all the time.
ten who dared
it tells the real story of an officer of the united states army called john wesley powell who was the first to travel up the colorado river with other nine men to make a map of the region, and the dangers they had to face in their trip.
some people say it is one of the worst movies made by disney.
the show was 30 minutes long, but now it is 45 minutes long.
bairiki is a village and an island now part of south tarawa, and one time is the center of government of kiribati.
he is most famous as a producer.
he sometimes invited women guests home, after a night out drinking alcohol.
a fugue is a piece of music written for a certain number of parts (voices).
this tune is called the subject.
each part has an equal share in playing the subject.
when we talk about the “parts” in a fugue we do not mean the “sections” of the piece but the number of voices needed to sing it or instruments to play it.
the more parts there are the harder it is to write a fugue because each part has got to sound interesting by itself, but together they must also make sense.
then the other parts come in one at a time until they are all playing.
sometimes one or two notes have to be changed so that the music sounds right.
when the second part comes in with the answer the first part will have to play something else, called a countersubject.
if none of the parts are playing the subject or answer (i.e.
this lasts until all the parts have entered.
it was often played after a prelude.
fugues can be very dramatic and exciting as each part comes in one at a time and the music builds up.
this is why many composers have ended long works with a fugue.
it belongs to the group of ground squirrels.
some problems with groundhogs are that they eat crops and dig around the foundations of buildings.
when groundhogs dig around buildings this can cause damage if the holes go too far under the building.
only the mother looks after the young, which are born completely helpless.
young squirrels are deaf and blind during the first few weeks of their life.
they usually become mature after two.
one source was college students who were not happy about the way the country was headed.
they did not like the way african americans were being treated in the south or the way young men were being drafted to fight in the vietnam war.
more and more people were unhappy about the vietnam war and the riots.
they did this to explain things from the bible.
their name comes from the fact that they look like little kangaroos, when they are standing upright.
they also live in deep burrows that protect them from the worst heat of the day.
they drink water very rarely, since it may be hard to find.
they can also chemically split off water from the food they eat.
most often they are a tone of dark yellow to deep brown.
during hibernation, the body uses fat for energy, which the animal has typically gathered in summer and autumn.
they live in parts of australia.
the length of their body is about 25 centimetres, and the tail is shorter than the body.
it was known before as "brontosaurus".
many cities were part of it.
it is a kind of brandy.
it is made around the city of cognac.
only a few very special kinds of grapes may be used to produce the brandy.
it is in the province of north holland.
it is also a way to prepare meat which is then cooked with that instrument.
courtney (aly) decides to give up the money after she was told not to just to save the family.
they created an early form of democracy.
it may have to do with a person or many people.
students still use these ideas when they learn about mathematics.
christ is lord and we will very soon witness the day that those who currently deny and claim ignorance, will bow and admit with the tongues of their mouths that christ is indeed the son of the living god.
when he opened his music bag he saw that he had forgotten to put his music in it".
"george was playing from the music, but it was hard to read because some of the notes were badly printed".
it would be difficult for the violinist to play from music with both parts because he would need to turn the pages too often.
this makes it easier to find the instruments than if they had been drawn all the way down the page.
some notes will, of course, have to be left out to make it possible to play with just two hands.
short scores are not usually published, they are just working copies while the piece is being composed.
this might be for keeping count of how much money they owed (e.g.
a fact which makes red blood cells different to all other cells is that red blood cells do not have a nucleus, since they need lots of room for haemoglobin.
it is also largest city of moldova.
he studied at the school that is now known as katedralskolan.
this is the same basic system used today.
they are found in the blood or other body fluids of vertebrates.
if a doctor were to look at one, he or she would call it a globulin, because that is what it is shaped like.
they are the largest flying birds that still exist.
it can also be animals that died.
nasser also fought the six day war with israel but israel won.
it is known to build large nests in high places, like on chimneys.
they may be used for many years.
if the pub offers rooms where people can sleep at night, it is usually called an inn.
some pubs hire servers to bring drinks to people who are sitting at tables or in chairs.
tapirs cannot see very well, but they have good hearing and a very good sense of smell.
after a pregnancy of about 13 months, the female gives birth to a single baby.
after half a year the baby starts to lose the baby-coloring of its fur.
when the young tapir is one year old it looks like an adult tapir, and it leaves its mother.
a tattoo is a mark made by putting ink into the skin.
they are very fast runners, and they can run with a speed of 60 - 70 km/h for a distance of 5 km.
it lives in the prairies, but sometimes also in the desert and the rocky mountains.
when the female is close to giving birth, it leaves the group for a time to give birth to its offspring.
the babies hide for three days, and after a week they can run with their mother.
they also eat grains and vegetables from fields.
after a pregnancy of 200 days the female gives birth to 2-4 babies.
they drink milk for 3 months.
when the young water deer are 6 months old they are independent and leave their mothers.
they become mature when they are 1 year old.
it can mean: the study of how to write music for an orchestra.
it can also mean the list of instruments that are used in a particular piece of music.
they both wrote books on orchestration which are still very useful today.
one team of two people plays against a solo person to see if two heads are better than one.
the board is the same, except that the spaces are colored gold, and sometimes more than one letter is seen in each space.
if they miss a question, a block will go up and they will have to work their way around it.
its capital is curitiba - the largest city in the south of the country - and it is a famous state because of itaipu dam and the iguaçu falls.
the portuguese and their descendants are present in large numbers in almost all towns.
it was started to help one another if russia attacked either of them.
today, rctv's shows are said to be seen in more than 60 countries and heard in more than 20 languages.
this is how the body fights infections.
this is also how the body helps stop cancers.
they can be healthy for years.
even the common cold can kill someone with aids.
sex is one way to get hiv.
some of these people share needles.
many of these people think this because of their religion.
they do not want people to have condoms because they do not think people should have sex unless they are married.
they also think that married people should not use condoms, because they believe that if people have sex, it should only be to make a baby.
it is the second largest state by area and the third largest state by population.
the sheep are being taken care of by little bo peep.
this will make life very hard for mary and the children she lives with.
it will make her have to marry barnaby.
the helium inside them keeps them up in the air and the propellers can push it through the air.
in some countries people had to fight to get it.
they thought it was important to have it because they wanted to choose who ruled over them.
a celebrity is a person who is well known and gets lots of public attention, or attention from other people.
a person whom the public knows such as a person in government might be well known but not a celebrity unless something else makes them interesting to other people.
it remained completely calm after beginning of war in the year 1914.
defeats in the first world war.
the beginning of the first world war represented then the beginning of the end.
still in the evening of the 1.
but a call of the dumapräsidenten instructed those of military about the fact that the time had long overhauled such a lean concession.
this made at the same time a decision, which should seal the end of the monarchy at all only in paternal welfare service.
it also had a name from iraq.
the brain can not survive more than a few minutes without oxygen.
high salt use has received the greatest attention.
the money used to buy the dvd set was given to africa.
script could mean different types of writing that is carefully put together.
this is important in economics, because supply and demand decide how much of a good will be bought and sold.
it is the amount of goods that people want to buy at a given price.
this flag was used however never to larger extent and was only four months in official use.
the coat of arms has a hammer and sickle, a red star over the earth, and two ears of wheat covered by red ribbons.
at first it had six red ribbons on the ears of wheat.
first win in the race for bmw.
the people were allowed to choose their own council.
she was an important person in the small town.
the invading troops of the red army set parts of the city on fire.
houses were built here for the families of the people working in the industry.
since the fall of the iron curtain many people have left the town.
the building was going to be used as a administrative center and meeting place.
this would have made it the largest building of the world at that time.
during its design, there were many changes to how it would look and to the location of the palace in moscow.
they thought that it would be safe to do this, but they were very wrong.
the soldiers had to do what they were told and keep walking over to the german trenches, even though they were walking straight into bullets.
this is why so many soldiers died.
many of the soldier's bodies lay in the mud for weeks after they had been killed because it was too dangerous for other soldiers to go and get them.
it is a peaceful village with about 1300 people living in it.
most of the people living here work on agriculture.
they are quite free in form.
chopin does not tell us about any particular story he had in mind.
perhaps they are just musical stories.
they are four of his finest works.
in the coat of arms a white g is to be recognized, which stands for gelsenkrichen.
this takes almost four days to travel.
they are very beautiful and there is a lot of variety and interest in them.
many of them are not all that difficult to play.
the team leading at the end of the season is called "meister".
season is the time of the year where games are played.
as a rule, a season begins in the second half of one year and ends in the first half of the next year.
the leading team is found through the number of points gained during the season.
the season is split into two parts.
it is above the sea level.
it is a fairly new airline that only started running in march 2007.
it is up to the airlines to decide what levels are the same as their own levels.
each year a different country takes over the presidency of the group for the duration of the year.
it's usually held for three days in the middle of the year.
every organ has a reason to be there.
this was written by a group who later became called the weathermen and were involved in more violent protests.
influence is a force (or power) of change that comes from the outside of the person or thing that is influenced by it.
this word is often used to describe famous people.
influence can be a bad thing too.
is a very important one for philosophers, and many people think aristotle is the first human being to have thought seriously about the question.
the first was held in 1947.
it is the most famous of all dance forms.
he also started to use the title “waltz”.
many people thought that the new dance was bad.
this was because the dancing couples stood very close to one another and held one another in their arms (in the old minuet they held hands politely).
some people thought that it was very immoral and wrote angry letters to the newspapers saying that it was the end of civilised society.
it has a main tune, then a set of variations, and at the end it comes back to the first tune.
this form became a common way of writing a group of waltzes.
lots of different instruments have a share in playing the variety of tunes.
they only come together to mate.
there have been lots and lots of stuff made about this character.
many of his relatives are famous.
there are nine regions of england.
many of them are for organ.
they are not pieces to be followed by anything, they are just separate pieces of music.
some are not too difficult to play, but others are very hard (virtuoso).
they had a lot of power in their own district.
people disagree about whether he is one of the really great composers, or just a very skilled musician.
he could write music very quickly.
they are known for working with many other people.
it was the result of over four years of work.
even though they said it would be done in 2006, they decided they couldn't finish it until 2007.
music said that they would start selling it on may 15, 2007.
after 14 months, they made it better by taking out five songs out.
they are also planning to begin working on their fourth album.
bamberg is a very famous town because it has many buildings which are very old.
unlike many other german towns such as nürnberg it was almost not destroyed during world war ii.
bamberg is like rome because it is built on seven hills, each one with a church at the top.
the left arm of the river is where the old town centre lies.
very close by is a big square called maximiliansplatz.
when the square is empty it looks very big.
the names of nearby streets tell a lot about the town history.
this leads down to the left arm of the river regnitz where one can see the place where the boats used to stop to load and unload their goods.
it is not on the island, but it is was built by the people who drove huge beams of wood into the riverbed.
from here one can see abbey church of st michael at the very top of the hill.
it was completed in 1992 and makes it possible for boats to travel from the north sea to the black sea.
in the town itself many people travel by bus.
the university is spread over lots of buildings in the town centre.
there are 4 different body positions that a person can use when diving.
it is used when someone explains something a little too difficult to understand.
but there are some things that are similar.
it is based on the historic event of the life and death of the roman emperor julius caesar.
it is believed that it was produced during the late 15 hundreds.
arguments about who was the owner of what land let to many wars in the continent.
he got more land by fighting wars and also when his family died some of their land became his.
in spain the reconquista was still happening and several important cities were captured again from the moors.
in europe anti-semitism became worse because several authorities made laws which said that jewish people must wear yellow badges so people knew who they were.
it gives the reasons for writing the constitution.
the preamble is one of the best known parts of the constitution.
the number of members from each state depends on how many people live there.
article one also says how the congress will do its business and what kinds of laws it can make.
it also says that state governments must treat citizens of other states as fairly as they treat their own citizens, and must send arrested people back to another state if they have been charged with a crime.
an amendment can change any part of the constitution, except one — no amendment can change the rule that each state has the same number of seats in the senate.
after the bill of rights, there are 17 more changes to the constitution that were made at different times.
it is one of the oldest cities in hungary.
the hungarians tried to take back the city many times, so it was destroyed again in the wars.
it is a way for people to travel quickly and cheaply not in their cars.
people would sit in the carts and then the horses would pull them where they wanted to go.
trams have been around for a very long time and they used to be pulled by horses.
they were first used in the late 1860's.
it is a small town with only 2,500 people living in it.
they did not think anything would grow on the land, so they moved on and did not come back.
however a lot of the land was not good for growing things, and stirling sent men all over the state to find better land.
by 1850, the settlers were growing their own food but there were few roads, as roads cost money to build but did not make money.
but now there were thousands of people and many of them had never been to britain, an eight month journey away by sea.
the government decided to hold a referendum and ask the people whether they wanted to start their own country, and 68% said yes.
when the war ended, a lot of people from europe who had lost their homes in the war came to western australia, as land was still very cheap.
perth grew from being a small town to being a big city in just 30 years.
when he was old he had alzheimer's disease which made him forget a lot of things.
like his father he is also a drummer and has played with groups like the who and oasis.
if people use heroin, they may take too much and get sick or even die.
when a person is intoxicated, they can get hurt if they drive a car or a boat.
as well, when a person is intoxicated, they may do dangerous things, such as have unsafe sex with a person that they do not know, or get into a violent fight with a person.
there is also the danger of "withdrawl".
this means that if a person starts taking the drug, they will want to keep taking it, and it will be hard to stop, even if the drug is making a person sick (ill).
addiction means that a person will do much more than usual to get enough money to buy another dose of the drug.
this means that they will sell things they have.
there are many slang street names for this drug, and they can be different from place to place.
the word comes from the latin word for "chapel".
until about 200 years ago, these people often had their own private orchestras.
it was the land in the south of the island of great britain.
it is now two home nations.
in the judaism, rabbi is a title used in order to distinguish the one that teaches, the one that has the authority of the doctors of the torah or that one pointed by the religious leaders of the community.
today the rabbis are responsible for the education and for application of the teachings of the judaism.
it is polite to use this word when needed to describe a person who is not jewish, as in "my friend robert is a gentile".
they may be used to progress in certain parts of the game, or they can be used to stun enemies.
the coin system has also changed.
right now there are 14 games in the main series.
that way, only a few people could afford the cost of living.
this was the start of the great depression.
sega however wanted this to be a secret and became very angry.
many of these companies also forced people to pay a lot of extra money for the dreamcast than in the usa and japan.
counting is something people do to find out how many things there are of any kind.
the person counting usually starts with the number one, and gives this number to the first thing.
the next thing is given the number two.
each thing gets its own number in this way.
the last number given to the last thing counted shows how many things there are.
counting is starting at a number and changing it up or down a certain number of times.
in the examples above, counting started at one and then it changed by one each time something was counted.
so at first the count was one.
counting can go up or down.
counting can be done on fingers.
it has been shown that some birds are good at counting.
are birds that are good at counting.
this is now the main job of the shuttle.
this happened because some of the heat shield broke off the shuttle during lift-off, after being hit by a piece of the external tank.
thor was one of the most powerful norse gods well known for his fights with the race of giants.
it is done on a large board with a sail.
the sail helps the board change directions.
this is because they have less material to cut through the wind.
there are many sporting places around the world that people travel to just to go surfing.
horses were the fastest way for people to travel on land before cars were invented and the only way to travel long distances in a reasonable amount of time.
thoroughbreds are known around the world for their speed, but also for their jumping ability, which make them good for show jumping and other horse activities.
that means they are build in onto a mainboard and can not be removed.
of course all of this is done under the control of some software.
when charlie was a child, he was kept in bed for many weeks from a bad illness.
at night, his mother would sit at the window and act out what was going on outside.
his first important work came when he joined the eight lancashire lads.
it is played in many countries all around the world.
the field played on is rectangular and has a goal at each end.
the object is the same as in sudoku, but the puzzle only uses the numbers 1 through 6.
each one is fighting with the help of their own ten-foot spiders.
he was one of the kings who tried to get along with the romans as they invaded.
she is most famous for leading her people in uprisings against the roman empire who controlled the island of britain at the time.
some amateur choirs let anyone who is interested sing with them, others may ask people to audition to see whether they are good enough before allowing them to join.
this means that there are two or more singers who are singing the same notes.
if the music divides into more than four parts this can be shown in the same way, e.g.
the word “chorus” can also be used for the name of a choir.
later it became possible for the organist to play it from the main console.
all of the different parts of the computer are connected to the motherboard.
many of the major parts that are attached to the board are able to be removed in the future so that they can be upgraded.
these colors make it easier to pair the plug to the port.
they were first sold in the 1980s.
napoleon is an ordinary school kid who gets bullyed he does not have a good home life.
running keeps a person fit and active.
running makes a person thirsty, so it is important to drink water when running.
some people may hate running because it is an hard and exhausting work.
certain types of dogs are used to keep their owners or their owners safe from danger.
these dogs are called guard dogs.
a dog will sometimes bark at people it does not know and may alert its owner that way.
such dogs are called watchdogs and do not usually become a guard dog.
guard dogs may be trained to attack when given a command to do so.
lots of people want dogs to keep them safe or look after things, so they buy dogs that are trained to be guard dogs.
guard dogs have been trained by people to bark at strange people, and sometimes they even attack people that come near them.
guard dogs are very important to people, but if you ever see a guard dog it is better to leave it alone as it might bark, bite or attack.
at the age of 10 he left school to work in the coal mines.
he was able to have more than 110 acts passed into law..
how it keeps animals healthy is not known in a lot of detail.
the silence of the lambs
it is also the name of the most important group in the setting.
the story was never finished, and that summer most people forgot about the lnh.
lawrence, the heroes read the script for the story they are in to find out how to beat the villain.
the size of a room changes to fit the number of people in the room.
both later returned from the dead...
doncaster is the second largest town in the united kingdom and is larger and has more residents than many cities.
doncaster has fought to become a city for many years but has failed to achieve this title.
the location of the gates can still be seen in the town today.
doncaster is one of the oldest racecourses in the world and hosts two famous horse races - the doncaster cup which is the oldest horse race in the world - and the st leger stakes which is the oldest classic horse race in the world.
doncaster was one of the first places in the country that made aeroplanes and had an airport.
the airport is growing very fast and lots of people from across the region and across europe now use doncaster as a popular destination - which is something that people have already been doing for the last 2000 years.
the girls are famous for their song.
she helps writing the music and songs.
she is one of the two guitarists.
let us all live crowned with glory,
she is famous for writing many poems.
she is from the state of massachusetts.
sources say that she may have grown wildflowers and used them to show her mood in her poems.
most of what is known about her is from people who knew her and may not all be true.
her family had a good amount of money, and had many friends.
she had a normal life when she was a child.
when she became an adult she spent more and more time alone and started wearing only white.
every year more than 200,000 people come there to watch the race.
at the age of five, john was rescued from the burning rectory.
his health was poor and it hard to keep out of debt.a scheme of study which he drew up for 1721 with a time-table for each day of the week is still to be seen in his earlist diary.
sometimes it is used to mean a living person or person from history.
for example, a woman has a full glass of wine in one shot.
in a third shot, she has a full glass of wine again.
making sure that all the different stories and characters fit together is working with continuity.
he started playing the trumpet when he was eight.
they have very small legs and necks.
some have no legs at all; these move more like snakes than lizards.
their tails can grow back when part of it is cut off.
some can grow to be 35cm.
there are many books of his series.
one describes that he was the son of zeus and semele, and the other describes that he was the son of zeus and persephone, queen of the underworld.
speech becomes hard to understand and slurred.
at the nhs it can be treated
a laugh is a way of showing happiness.
it is a noise that a person makes when he hears something funny, like a joke, or is tickled.
sometimes people laugh when they are not happy.
there are different ways to laugh.
you can write a laugh in different ways.
it is "semi-aquatic", meaning some of the time it lives in water, some of the time it lives on land.
a dock is a place above water on the shore where boats can be tied.
solomon was a king of israel, the son of king david of israel.
he is written about in the bible.
many people know it as the best city to live in latin america.
many of the psalms in the bible were written by king david to god.
he was prime minister for over 7 years which was the most of anyone at the time.
this means that it is very soft.
it is also called lead black.
it is group 7 and is a non-metal.
the idea comes from latin "intelligo".
these problems may be easy to solve.
that is what is called learning.
other tests have to do with words.
since most of the words on these tests have to do with latin, some people say that an intelligence quotient only measures how much a person has learned latin.
people in other parts of the world have very different ideas about the mind.
some people try to build machines that try to act as if they were intelligent.
if the other player has the card, they give it to the one that asked, and the one that asked puts the pair in front of them and gets to go again.
these are like the male and female parts of plants.
pollination needs something to take the pollen from the male parts of a flower to the female parts of another.
there are two different ways that plants can be pollinated.
most of them do not have a smell, because birds cannot smell them.
they look around for discarded food and dead animals to eat as well as hunting and have learned how to live and breed in the same places as people.
they are more common inland these days because they can find food wherever people live, often on garbage dumps or in the streets of towns and cities.
seagulls are intelligent compared to other birds and have a very complicated system of noises and body movements that they use to talk to other seagulls.
we do not know how it got its name for sure.
only a few animals are found deep in caves.
people in the past are known to have lived in caves and even today caves can provide shelter for trekkers.
this can be a dangerous sport because caves sometimes have deep pits.
each person has 2 or 3 light sources.
people go into caves to try and explore more about the world.
the study of caves is called speleology.
it is different from other bovines because it has four horns instead of two.
world beat music
it comes from the wild goat.
people eat their meat and drink their milk, because people say that it is very good.
this is why people are sometimes called sheep.
it means that a person follows a group of people.
this can be because they trust the group.
or it can be because they are not thinking for themself.
this can be good if the group leads to something positive (like a field of grass to eat).
a group of sheep is called a flock.
sheep follow each other in basically the same way all the time, so there are special names for the different roles sheep play in a flock.
the sheep that is farthest away from the others is called the outlier, a word that is also used in statistics.
this sheep is willing to go out farther away from the safety of the flock to graze, but takes a chance that a predator like a wolf will attack it first, because it is alone.
another sheep, the bellwether, which never goes first but always follows an outlier, is the one that signals to the others that it is safe to go that way.
this is only known because of dolly.
she had sisters from the same dna, but they did not look the same.
this proved that environment has more to do with the way a sheep looks than heredity.
the domestic goat and other animals like it belong to this genus.
many of the books have been made into television movies, where the stories were told in a different order from the books.
the first book is set in the year 1799, while the last is set in the years 1820 to 1821.
there were also three short stories set between other books.
a protest is when a lot of people come together to show others that they strongly like or are against an idea or event.
there are many ways in which people can protest.
it started as a trading place of the vikings.
and was sometimes the seat of the parliament.
and was heard about for the first time in the year 1040.
it had the name of the sovereign and a religious verse on it.
it is in its fifth season as of 2008.
some people compete against each other.
there are also some line dances, in which people dance as a group instead of with a partner.
scientists believe that if they existed they could be created by black holes.
the group is made up of four members.
the have also made a movie.
both girls and boys really enjoy the wiggles in their early years.
when you throw in you have to keep your hands behind your head and your feet on the ground or the throw will be passed on to the other team.
they are covered with tall grasses.
they may have an open bush layer, but not too many trees.
a peasant is a name for a person that worked for others and never had much money.
peasants worked on farms and had to be able to do a number of jobs on the farm.
peasants usually lived in the country region of their country and made up a large amount of the population.
six months later a royal wedding was announced.
in australia a person will generally start secondary school when they are at the age of twelve and finish when they are either sixteen or eighteen, depending on whether they finish with years 11 and 12.
in some schools in australia years 11 and 12 are just a normal part of high school.
a choice is the act of making a decision.
making a choice is making a resolution to do something or act a certain way.
from what we are going to have for breakfast to whether we drive or walk to work.
some people believe that every person and animal in has a right to free choice.
however some criminals have to have some of their free choice and will removed, when they are put in jail, because they have committed a crime or hurt people.
he was from the labor party.
a plow is pulled across the ground by a human or animal.
ground that has been plowed is a good place for a farmer to grow food.
to help crops grow in areas where floods were rare, the soil had to be rejuvenated in a different way.
these fields lift the train a small distance above the tracks and moves the train.
they are much faster than regular trains.
this same trip takes three days on a regular train.
after this technology has been perfected, people will be able to travel faster across land on a maglev train than they would in an airplane.
she even runs away to join a circus.
she is also a very kind friend to the rest of the children at her school, and never loses her smile.
they leave the house at half past nine every morning in rain or shine.
the girls of her school mean more to her than anything.
this means that someone does not get paid for the job he is doing (even if he may be doing it very well).
heat from the blood in the vessels helps warm the air as you breath.
the vomeronasal organ is found at the back of the septum and has a role in finding pheromones.
he will also appear in the final two films of this series.
although it could have been named, the subtropical storm remained without a name because the time of the discovery happened a long time after the official season had finished.
morning is the time of day from 12:00 am to 12 pm.
many people say it is not morning until they wake up.
many people use the morning as a time to get ready for the day.
many people also buy a morning newspaper to read about what is going on in the world.
many people also find out about the news on the television or the radio.
disinfectant is a dangerous liquid and should be used carefully because it can be deadly to humans and animals when in large amounts.
strength suggests ability to do something and the power a person has to use to do it.
another word for this is "storey".
this can be confusing for people visiting other countries.
fish is very popular, but people also eat sea vegetables and pork.
only fools and horses
this is the second time a storm was named nicole.
this group is present in many substances.
some of them are even used to produce drugs.
that way the some of the poison could be neutralized.
ten tropical storms formed during the season including one without a name, and five of these which became hurricanes.
parts of cedar key and crystal river were flooded from the high sea waves associated with alberto.
the southern-most low slowly moved to the south as it became more organised, a few hundred miles east of the north carolina coast.
the table on the right shows the ace for each storm in the season.
these names will be used for storms that form in the north atlantic in 2006.
it would again start with alpha.
there are many places to be visited.
at its brightest it is still too dim to be seen with the naked eye.
an aquarium can be a small tank, or a large building with one or more large tanks.
they show the fish and other animals they keep in large tanks, and also often protect species that are close to extinction.
since the year 2000, the coat of arms was defined by court decision to the coat of arms of russia.
it is based on the coat of arms used before the soviet union.
the three crowns were added in 1625.
after a bear takes the life of the oldest brother, impulsive youngest brother kenai kills the bear in revenge, only to be changed into a bear himself by the great spirits.
then it uses it when food becomes scarce.
they can live 5 to 7 years in captivity.
they can survive a long time without drinking.
they bury themselves under the sand until night so that there are not as many predators that will attack them.
they have great powers and technology.
most saiyans can be easily noticed by their tail but some have lost their tails.
he is often seen with a group of other characters who help him.
he learns that it is more important to be a good person than a smart person.
people have been making things out of soapstone for thousands of years.
magoo was not able to see well because he was very farsighted.
the two parts are then cooked together.
this was done to take several unusual kinds of jam made in the eu into account.
when something is not considered new anymore, it may be considered old.
different things go out of date or grow old at different rates.
for example technology has a short life span and can be considered old after only one year.
human beings can by considered young at 20 years old, yet a cat would be considered old at 20 years old, because humans live much longer than cats.
a penalty kick is taken by the team which has been fouled if the violent act is made in the penalty box.
the plant it grows on is a vine.
some of this music is hard to play, but other pieces are quite easy.
many children learn to play some of the pieces in his "album for the young".
sometimes he felt very happy but at other times he was very depressed.
these changes of mood can be heard in a lot of his music.
as a boy he liked reading the books in his father’s shop.
his family wanted him to be a lawyer, so he went to leipzig to study law but he hardly ever went to any lectures.
he was much more interested in music and literature, but also in women and drinking.
many years later she was to become his wife.
he loved the music of schubert and when he heard that schubert had died he cried all night.
whatever the reason, he could not continue to be a pianist and he spent the rest of his life composing and writing about music.
her father did everything he could to stop the marriage.
he felt depressed again at this time and drank a lot of beer and champagne.
it took him some time to recover.
by now he was good at writing all kinds of music.
he was rescued by some boatmen, but when they brought him to land he seemed to have gone quite mad.
he was taken to an asylum where he spent the last two years of his life.
although he had to give up his career as a pianist his wife clara played his pieces and helped them to become famous.
although the young schumann seemed to prefer writing short pieces, he became more interested in long works after meeting mendelssohn.
a lecture is when someone talks to a group of people about something interesting.
this means that he was told off for doing something wrong.
her father taught her the piano.
he did everything he could to stop the marriage.
they had a happy marriage and had eight children.
in those days people thought that women should not be composers.
musical composition means putting notes together to make a piece of music.
they will do this by looking at famous pieces of music to see how the composers of the past wrote music.
the reason a person's time can be different from another's is because of time dilation, which can be thought of more easily by the twin paradox.
this is shown by a pair of twins.
imagine that one of the twins goes away at fast speeds while the other twin stays home.
when he returns, the twin that travelled will be younger than his brother who stayed at home.
this is because time moved slower for him while he was traveling than for his brother who stayed home.
how it works with special relativity.
cyclone steve moved to the west southwest near the pilbara coast and increased in strength during the day and was raised to a category 2 system early on march 6.
however, the system did not grow in strength and made its fourth and last landfall at around midnight on march 9 east of denham.
in cairns, a very big fig tree was wiped out with the entire root system out of the ground.
it was replaced with the name stan.
she was born in the new york.
it was first used in spain.
spain then brought it to its colonies.
she was married to a man called joe macer, and she also had three grandchildren called vicki, mark and rebecca and a dog called betty.
do not wear long clothing, because it can get stuck in a tool.
the words hard and soft wood comes from the type of tree it came from.
this can also be true for other sensations.
he has done much work with jack nance, who has appeared in all but two of his movies.
he is also famous for his early short films.
the dark side of the moon
dark side of the moon is about life.
an idea expressed is that people give themselves so much to do, yet so little time to do it.
he died just before the end of the war in july 1945.
a nanny is someone hired to take care of the children in a family.
they are usually female but there are also male nannies.
this was not popular and the high court said that it could not be done.
the high court of australia is the most powerful court in australia.
it is longer than the flute.
the fingering for the note c on the flute will give a g on the alto flute.
the town grew the most in the 1950s and 1960s, when it became the first new town in the world.
stevenage started as a village and people have lived there since roman times.
some roman remains were found when the new town was being built.
in 1281, stevenage was allowed to have a market twice a week and a fair every year.
the fair still takes place every year.
the changes could take 10 years.
the town is a very green town, with lots of trees and grass.
there are also many playing fields.
but it can be shown as a picture very easily with graph theory.
the problem is that of a salesman.
some of those cities are connected with each other, for example by airplanes, or by road or railway.
the question is how to find the best route for the salesman to go to the cities.
the salesman wants to keep both the travel costs, as well as the distance he travels as low as possible.
he must go to each city exactly once, and at the end, he must be in the city he started in.
if there is a way to break this hard problem into smaller problems, the smaller problems will be at least as hard as the original one.
many people have studied this problem.
haze is a problem with the air quality in which smoke covers the sky, making it hard for people to breathe.
the show is about the lives of people that live in a fictional street called ramsay street.
a few years later he started playing shows again.
he was told by doctors that he would have to remain on medical oxygen for the rest of his life.
the novel is about a young man who makes a monster by bringing a dead body back to life.
he used parts from dead bodies.
they are often cheaper and still of very good quality.
these hairs gradually fall out when the bow is used a lot.
when a lot of the hairs have fallen out the player can have the bow re-haired.
when the bow is new, or when it has just been re-haired, it will not make any sound until the hairs have been well rubbed with rosin (also called “colophony”).
they may need to rosin the bow for a short while each time they play.
this holds the hair in place.
there are other instruments which use bows.
in the renaissance the viols were played with a bow which was held with the palm upwards.
they have to learn to control the bow so that it makes a lovely sound on the string.
they learn to control the bow with strong fingers, but never to hold the bow tightly.
the bow is held in the right hand.
the left hand makes the different notes by putting the fingers firmly down on the fingerboard.
in fast music he may only use a small part of the bow.
a downbow feels stronger than an upbow, so it is usually used for the first beat of the bar.
to play quietly the bow should be nearer the fingerboard.
to play loudly it should be nearer the bridge.
this is the italian word for "bow".
a bow is when a person bends their body forward from the waist in order to greet someone or show respect for them.
a bow is sometimes not much more than a quick nod of the head, but it can be a very deep bow from the waist.
when meeting the queen or someone very high and important.
this meant bowing and at the same time drawing back the right leg so that it scraped the floor.
the man would hold his left hand over his waist while doing this.
in christian worship people in churches will bow to the altar to show respect to jesus.
it is especially important in japan.
there are different degrees of bowing, and it is very important in japanese culture to know the right way to bow on different occasions.
the men have their hands by their sides, women have one hand over the other in front of their body.
japanese mothers carry their babies on their backs, so that children learn to bow even before they can speak.
many people like it because of this.
it was as big as an elephant”.
the dog may have been big, but it was certainly not as big as that.
the group was formed in the year 1999.
who claimed to be a prophet like the ones in the old testament.
the book claims that the language it was first written in was made from "the learning of the jews and the language of the egyptians."
the main purpose of the book of mormon is to teach about jesus christ.
wars happen all the time between the two groups.
two dead and 14 hurt of liberating troops and 20 dead and 40 hurts of the spanish troops.
also known as the earthquake of the andes.
once in the year 1976 and another time in the year 2005.
in general, a jew is someone who belongs to the religion called judaism.
some people who come from a jewish family or a part-jewish family think of themselves as jewish even when they do not practice judaism.
after most judeans were forced out by the romans, the word started to mean people of the jewish religion, and not just those from judea.
they were victims of various persecutions; the one that happened during the second world war is known as the holocaust
this meant that the government had no money.
many people think of him as a hero while others consider his government to have been poor.
his government stopped some of the changes made by the whitlam government.
it is in the center of toronto.
his government moved labor to the right economically.
he lost the second time and retired.
the united nations secretary-general is one of the most important people in the united nations.
many people grow them in the garden.
usually they are planted in the sun.
she has been interested in animals since childhood.
he thought that she would do a lot of important research, and sent her to africa.
many people thought she could not live and do research in a dense forest of africa, because she had no experience or background.
one day, she saw a chimpanzee putting a stick in an ant hole to catch white ants.
she is a caring person who has a soft spot for monkeys.
even though he was blind when he was older, he still served at the college of arms until he died in 1995.
but he also died in the fire.
they can be served with jam and cream or just with butter.
they are served as a main dish or as a dessert, depending on the filling.
sweet wine can also be added to the batter.
according to tradition, this used to be done in order to use up the last of the fat and rich foods before lent which was a time when people did not eat rich foods.
they are cooked on a large griddle with lots of holes for each poffertje.
a person who does this is called a cosplayer.
it uses randomness, but does not touch whether the result is correct or not.
that's 6 choices because a can be put in 3 different places, b has 2 choices left after a is placed, and c has only one choice left after a and b have been placed.
for the second object, there are only two choices left as the first object has already been chosen.
), which can be written as 3×2×(1!)
to the user, the card will look the same as it did in old times, only this time it will be on the screen.
it does this by using something called a transaction.
it is used to carry many cars.
it is a different place than the home of the mortals, midgard.
it is the home of mortals.
he will poison the land and sea.
the final battle will take place on the plain of vigrond.
midgard and almost all life on it will be destroyed, with the earth sinking into the sea.
they could not decide who threw the spear that caused the boar to die.
the rest of his education he had from his father.
he was only 12 when he fell in love with a girl called estelle who was 18.
when he was 17 his father said that he wanted him to be a doctor.
this is how he earned most of his money for the rest of his life.
he tried four times to win the important music prize called prix de rome.
the second time he wrote a piece called "herminie" which had a tune he used later as the main tune for his "symphonie fantastique".
in the end he married her.
the marriage was not a success.
he said that he had plenty of work in paris.
on his way there he visited his parents who seemed to have forgiven him for not studying medicine.
they could now be proud because their son was so successful.
he did not like the city of rome, although he did like florence.
when he heard the news that camille now loved another man he became so furious that he left rome in order to return to paris to kill them both.
at the end of his time in italy he returned to paris, visiting his parents on the way.
the next year they had a son.
he hardly earned any money from composing.
most of the money he earned came from musical journalism, which is something he hated.
paganini had asked him to write it for him to play, but when paganini saw the music he did not like it because it was not “showy” enough for the viola.
he was becoming more famous abroad than at home in france, although he still continued to go back to paris.
he knew it would be almost impossible to find anyone who would put on a performance.
it only became possible in 1863 after he had divided the work into two parts.
it contains some of his best music.
he had lost two wives, and his two sisters had also died.
he started to walk in cemeteries.
he wrote regularly to her for the rest of his life, and stayed with her three times in grenoble where she lived with her son.
he went to nice on the way home, where he twice collapsed while walking by the sea.
he went back to paris where he was cared for by his mother-in-law.
many of his works are difficult to describe.
he was not good at playing any instrument, but could imagine all the sounds in his head.
although people like franz liszt and busoni thought he was a great composer, it is only in recent years that most people have realized how good his music is.
the story was told by many people that he died when a bookcase collapsed on top of him, but that story is proved not to be true.
he wrote music for lots of plays.
he did not have the genius of handel, but he had a great gift for writing beautiful tunes.
it makes it easier to find a name or a title in the list.
different languages have different rules for sorting.
after that, the third and fourth letters are used until the whole list is sorted.
names are often written with the last names first.
this way is often used for numbers in titles.
the white notes are named by the letters a to g of the alphabet.
after g comes another a and so on.
this makes it easy to see the pattern of white notes.
where there are two black notes together, for example, the white note between them is d. the black notes do not have names of their own.
they are named after the white notes next to them.
the black note just above (i.e.
the black note just below (i.e.
this means that each black note has two possible names (e.g.
by playing on white notes from c to the next c we get a major scale.
in a diagram this can be shown as a circle which is called the “circle of fifths”.
instead of going up to the fifth note (e.g.
it only lives in the sea.
the fish can be easily recognised by a black line on the white side of the fish.
the first race was in 1935.
the race was run in the spring until 1995.
some think that it acts as a fluid to stop sperm from another male impregnating the female so that the children of only one male can survive.
it is the person talked to.
it is usually made of glass or plastic.
special fibers are used for this, that change how they pass light through when there is a change around the fiber.
these fibers are also used to carry light for humans to see.
this is a long thin probe that can be put into a small hole, that will send an image of what is inside through the fiber to a camera.
these bars show the population in groups of ages, with woman in one side and man in the other side.
quarries are often used to cut stone from the ground in large pieces or blocks.
they are used for building things.
some quarries fill with water to make small lakes when they are no longer being used for mining.
they had a great deal of troubles.
dreams are the things that happen in a person's mind while they are sleeping.
dreams can seem so real while they happen that the person might think that they are awake.
this happens very little for most people, but for some people it happens often.
during lucid dreaming people can have fun and do things that are not possible in real life.
most people do not remember their dreams unless they wake up in the middle of the dream.
when people have nightmares, they often wake up in the middle of the night.
there are many different theories about why people dream about what they dream about.
there are many books and websites devoted to making sense of dreams.
these can easily be torn by blows to the face or mouth.
it may be removed during circumcision.
this does not cause a great deal of pain but can cause an alarming amount of blood loss.
each male has two of them.
blood can leave only through a system of veins around the outside wall of the corpus cavernosum.
this means it started in 2007 and takes place in early 2008 ahead of when it is actually shown.
they appear to slowly get smaller as a person gets older.
a fermion is one of the things that everything is made of.
fermions are special because you cannot put two of them in the same place at the same time.
this is different to photons, where you can have many in the same place at the same time.
the river runs from lake tear of the clouds near mount marcy in essex county in the north part of the state to new york harbor in new york city at the south part of the state.
the hudson river is a special kind of river called an estuary.
there is some salt in the water from new york city north until poughkeepsie.
the border for the salt in the water moves when the tide rises and falls.
another name for this river is the north river.
the symbol of the brigade is a green olive tree with its roots on a yellow background.
a salt mine is a mine where salt is taken from the earth.
getting salt from different layers of rock in a mountain used to be a very dangerous job.
usually the salt is mixed with rock that has chlorides and sulfates.
salt mines are empty if there is no salt left to take, or if taking the salt that is left would be too expensive.
it shows which notes have to be changed into sharps or flats.
for example: if there is one sharp in the key signature it will be an f sharp.
this is because a scale can start on any note, and there are twelve notes within an octave: seven white notes and five black notes on a keyboard.
the reason why there are fifteen and not twelve is because three of them have two possible names: f sharp major (6 sharps) can also be called g flat, c sharp is d flat and b is c flat.
the same note but with a different name.
there are two reasons for writing a key signature.
this helps to understand the music better.
if the composer wants a c sharp he writes a sharp sign in front of the c that needs to be sharpened.
this will last for the rest of the bar (measure).
if he wants a b flat he has to write it in.
if he wants an f instead of the usual f sharp he writes a natural sign.
an f double sharp is an f sharp that has been sharpened.
it is the same note as g.
key signatures are written at the beginning of each line of music.
if the music is going to stay in the new key for some time the composer may decide to change the key signature.
it is easier to read the music if it is written in a flat major (4 flats).
the best way to find out which it is would be to see whether the end of the piece is based on g major or e minor.
this is often the case when the music is atonal or not very firmly in one key.
if there are lots of sharps and flats and the bars are very long they may write accidentals in front of every note that needs one instead of just once in a bar.
this should be explained at the top of the music.
it may also be because the piece is modal.
she is also the first woman and the first italian-american to be the speaker of the house.
another name for this river is the south river.
at first they were in charge of driving the beatles's musical equipment to places where they were to perform, setting it up ahead of time, and taking it down later to prepare for their next show.
the sound of their music had caused a traffic jam on the street below.
early in 1976, evans had a fight with his girlfriend, who called the police when he locked himself in a room with a pistol.
before she died the congress made her spiritual leader of the nation.
by the time of her death, she was one of the most powerful women, or maybe even the most powerful woman, in the world.
she ran the ministry of labor and the ministry of health.
after her husband was overthrown, her body was lost for almost 20 years, until it was found in italy.
it was brought back to argentina and buried with her husband after he died in 1974.
most bodies are embalmed, if they have to be on display or lie in state for a funeral.
part of it is controlled by the united states.
this base is also now used as a place to keep people captured by american forces from afghanistan and iraq.
some people say that these people do not get the rights that they should get as prisoners of war under the geneva conventions.
one reason that they are there may be that the laws of the united states do not apply to them.
this camp is a navy base and would sometimes hold people who had escaped from the cuban government by sea.
george w. bush has said that it is sometimes used for prisoners of war, but many human rights groups accuse america of keeping people from countries they are not at war with.
this was shown to be sometimes true when british prisoners were returned home in 2003.
this camp may be used for prisoners who are seen as terrorists by the united states.
these people are detained because there is not enough evidence to give them a trial in a court.
some of these people were captured during the war in afghanistan.
some were taken by force from other countries.
some prisoners have tried to kill themselves.
these prisoners are not forced to work, but they have not been given fair trials.
there is now some work starting to bring guantanamo prisoners to some justice.
some people have been sent back to their home countries, some have been sent to other countries.
some people who were shown to not be terrorists have then been released by their governments, some people are now in prison in their home countries.
in the early morning and late evening trains run every 20 minutes.
it is used in the stations.
to change trains you only have to go to the other side of the platforms.
it opened together with the u5.
the first bit was built in 1938, but it was opened in 1971.
he soon became very famous when he was a young man.
this means that many people from around the world play at once in the online world.
for example, if someone is a priest and he or she wants to cause damage to others, he or she goes down the shadow tree, and if they wants to heal themselves or a friend, he or she goes down the holy tree, or the discipline tree to reduce their damage.
some of the old buildings in this zone are
slave auctions were places where people were sold as slaves to other people.
in slave auctions, families were split up and sold to different owners for different amounts of money.
typically the largest slaves were the first to go because they were believed to be able to do more work.
many auctions were also meeting places to discuss the war and other important issues at the time.
grab and go was where a slave buyer would give the slave trader a certain amount of money and receive a ticket.
would open and the american would rush in and grab the slave or slaves that they wanted.
when slaves leave the ship, they were taken away and put in a 'pen'.
riots happen when many people meet to be violent.
the police are used to stop riots.
he was still only 18 when he got his own orchestra together and gave his own concert which included six of his own waltzes and some of his father’s.
he was soon becoming more famous than his father.
wherever he went he was surrounded by lots of admirers.
speaker of the house
the speaker of the house is the leader of the united states house of representatives in the government of the united states.
the speaker of the house is second in line for the presidency of the united states.
she is the first woman to be speaker of the house.
the reason why all the mamodos are in the real world is to battle.
when one enters the world, they must find a human to be their partner and to use a book of spells that came with them.
as a person becomes stronger physically and emotionally new spells are written into the book so that the human can read and use them.
harmonics in music are notes which are produced in a special way.
they are notes which are produced as part of the “harmonic series”.
in this article we are talking about sound waves, and we can understand it clearly by looking at the strings of a musical instrument.
this vibration makes the air vibrate and the sound waves travel to our ear so that we can hear it.
there is the basic note (the fundamental), but added to that are lots of other little notes that all add up to a sound in a special way that tells us that it is a violin playing and not a clarinet or a human voice.
every note that we hear on an instrument is really a combination of several notes or “harmonics”, even although we may not realize that we are hearing more than one note at a time.
play the lowest c on the piano.
press this key very slowly so that it does not sound and hold it down.
while holding it down play the bottom c again making it loud and very short.
they are very hard to play well.
up to 3 notes can be played by the left hand.
the cause of his death is not known.
experience is knowledge a person gets by doing something or watching someone else do it.
someone can gain experience from someone else telling them what they have experienced.
by making mistakes and learn from them, they learn more rather just reading about playing chess.
someone who experienced by watching or doing something himself is said to have had
when the first person tells another person, the other person has had
it was not handed down from the gods to the mortal.
it continued to be passed down this way through the time of the vikings.
these were written down during and after they turned to christianity.
she was the daughter of loki.
an example is some of the names of the days of the week.
this is because most people have an easier time playing notes from the bass clef, but some who are good at playing high notes play in the treble clef instead.
at that time it was called the sackbut.
it is used in almost every brass band in the world today.
one of the main reasons it is harder to use is because most bass's use a series of triggers that lower your pitch.
along with being such a low instrument it also gives the musician playing it the ability to use a larger mouthpiece.
unfortunately not many people have the courage and will to play the bass trombone, but for those who do i must say you are awesome.
this basically lets you use a few short cuts than can really save you some effort when playing a fast song because playing c in 1st is a lot easier tan playing it in 6th.
he never met his father and grew up with his mother and his grandfather.
she was born in israel in 1978 and was brought up in a small town near tel aviv.
at the age of 16 she took herself to the united states.
the wings are dark and it has a long black tail.
it is named "scissor-tailed" because its tail looks like a pair of scissors.
the main purpose of cartilage is to create a place on which bones can form when they are first created.
it also protects the places where bones rub against each other.
afterwards he had to join the working service and after that to join in the army.
he became prisoner of war in 1945.
the owner changed again several times.
he was one of the most famous composers of his time and influenced a lot of other composers.
when a person travels from one place to another, he or she goes up a train in a train station and then moves in it with other passengers until the train reaches the place he or she wants to come off, or alight.
sometimes he or she has to change trains.
a new line called the circle line is going to be finished.
the campus opened and the first class of students arrived in 1970.
they also thought that the world was changing a lot and needed a college where students would have a lot of responsibility for their own education to be successful in the future.
most students graduate in four years, but not everyone takes the same amount of time for each division.
the word public can mean different things.
a "survivor" is a person or animal which continues to live after something happens which might have killed them.
they might be one person who lives when ten people die in a car crash.
his main job was as an expert on military fortifications.
this may have been because he was jealous of their success.
permits let a person do something that he could not do without the permit.
it is the loss of water and air molecules.
these men hoped to find gold and silver in order to become wealthy and rich.
they built their town near a swamp.
the water was bad for drinking.
he went to munich, were his mother and his brothers and sister had been since 1893.
because of this both thomas and heinrich and their family moved to the united states in 1934.
heisenberg was a very good student and needed only three years to finish his studies.
this was a very young age for such a job.
this is not a sure thing.
some people have said that heisenberg was very much against the nazis.
some people have said that he must have been for them, because he worked for them.
it is sometimes used to describe a hatred of the religion and its followers and often actions taken in order to voice this fear and hatred.
after the war he was held in a prison camp in ludwigshafen.
call of duty 3
that marriage ended in divorce just before he joined ac/dc in 1980.
they are usually worn by women, but can be worn by men as well.
countries treat cos in various ways.
cos have been arrested or had to pay a fine.
some countries punished them by killing them.
often there were commissions to decide if someone really did not want to do armed service because of his beliefs or because of fear of war.
rule of law
the rule of law is the law that says that government can only legally use its power in the way the government and the people agree.
the rule of law is meant to be a prevent dictatorship and to protect the rights of the people.
by bowing on two strings and then quickly on the other two strings a violinist can sound as if he is playing a four-part chord.
the result is the answer to the problem.
first … parenthesis and exponent … what ever comes first as the person works from left to right.
second … multiplication and division … what ever comes first as they work from left to right.
the letters of the word represent the first letters of each word in the order of operations.
taxes could not be raised without the permission of the people.
the few would no longer rule the many and the government would not cost billions of pounds just to operate.
democracy is important because everyone gets a say in how the country should be run.
some people feel unhappy with their lives.
speech can be given to one person, to a few people, or to a large group of people.
a speech given by a person to a lot of people is called an address.
a person making a speech is called a speaker.
one speech can be understood as many different things, such as in different languages.
he appears as a 2 meter-tall man dressed in black armor and a cape.
his face is covered with a mask, which has a helmet on top.
he was also in most of the books that took place after these movies.
luke says that he can not go with him and returns home.
he goes back to obi-wan and agrees to go with him and learn about the force.
when they get there, they see that the planet is gone and there is a small moon close to where it was.
this small moon is the death star.
luke and the others go to yavin 4 so that the secret plans to the death star in r2-d2 can be used to destroy the death star.
luke uses the force and fires the missile that destroys the death star.
luke is saved by han solo.
luke faces difficult things to do.
before he completes his training he has a vision of the future.
in it his friends were being tortured.
when he gets there he sees that it was a trap set by darth vader.
vader gives luke the choice to join him but luke says no and jumps off the platform.
they then use this knowledge to help people who are sick.
it has a sweet taste and is odourless.
it is entirely dependent on humans and no longer lives in the wild; silk has been made for at least 5000 years in china.
they eat mulberry leaves day and night.
she was drinking tea under a tree when a cocoon fell into her tea.
she picked it out and as it started to wrap around her finger, she slowly felt something warm.
she taught this to the people and it became common.
death valley is a valley in the u.s.
lake manly used to be very large, but changes in the weather caused the rivers that brought water into the lake to dry up.
as the water dried, it left behind all the minerals that the rivers had brought to it along with their water.
many lakes and seas in other parts of the world are drying up in the same way.
the great salt lake in the u.s.
the changes in the weather that made the rivers dry up have not gone away.
death valley is still very dry.
because death valley is so dry all the time, even the dirt that is not covered in salt has become very hard.
this means that even though it does not rain often, when it does rain, the dirt cannot absorb all the water quickly enough, and the water can turn into a flash flood (a flood that happens very fast and very violently).
death valley can be very hot or very cold.
death valley was named in 1849.
many people died because it was so hot and dry.
this also happens because it is very far under sea level, and the water would have to travel for at least 60 minutes.
however, they are most often planted from large pieces cut from other mulberry trees, which easily take root.
one story says that she used her finger to touch a worm, causing a strand of silk to come out.
as the silk continued to come out, she wrapped it around her finger.
she asked her husband to give her a grove of mulberry trees, where she could keep the worms that made these cocoons.
leizu shared what she found out with others and the knowledge became common.
reforestation is often needed when trees are cut down to make lumber.
role of moths in the economy.
moths are difficult to kill and usually not killed by poisons that work on mosquitoes and flies.
the most important of these is the silkworm.
it is farmed for the silk with which it builds its cocoon.
most scientists think that this is because moths use the light of the moon to help them fly in a straight line.
he was the seventh child in a family of 11 children (2 boys and 9 girls).
his parents went to school and were well known.
she read a lot and knew about art and many other things.
he learned the alphabet from his mother at the age of three.
at age five, while learning to read and write, he also showed that he could draw and paint.
he stopped in his studies when he felt that the filipino students were not being treated right by the priests who were also their teachers.
he hoped to make changes in his country and to make the filipinos go to school.
he showed the bad things done by the priests and the people in the government and this led him and his relatives into trouble.
because of this, he and those who he knew were being watched by the government.
they were making up bad things against him.
they were able to get people to say bad things against him and linked him with the war.
he was never allowed to talk to these people.
it is very well written and became a famous poem.
the word can be used in different ways.
in this sense it was sometimes used to describe women and slaves.
in latin it was used to describe someone who was uneducated and did not know much.
by the middle ages the word seems to have become used in its modern meaning as someone who does not have much sense.
a court jester had the job of making the king feel happy when he was sad.
someone who is simple is a person who is not very clever or “streetwise”.
they are naïve and can easily be made to believe things because they are kind and expect everyone else to be kind as well.
that is why he can break the magic spell cast by klingsor.
the lips are a body part around the mouth.
an allergy is when someone cannot have a certain thing enter his or her body without getting sick.
if it is a food allergy, the person may get an upset stomach.
this can cause problems with the way their bodies work.
it has everything babies need to stay healthy, but with very little phenylalanine.
women with pku who are pregnant or trying to get pregnant have to be especially careful to follow this diet.
most people with pku can live as long and healthy as anyone else if the low-phenylalanine diet is started when they are babies and continued for the rest of their lives.
a group home is a private house that serves as a non-secure home for unrelated people who share a common characteristic.
there are typically from 3 to 16 residents, as well as a resident manager or service staff.
a group home can also refer to family homes in which children and youth of the foster care system are placed until foster families are found for them.
liverpool plans to move to a new stadium by the year 2008.
the leader of the royal navy is the lord high admiral, who happens to be queen elizabeth ii.
the mafia is a secret crime group working in many parts of the world that was created in italy more than 200 years ago.
everyone has a job to do.
each family will have a number of associates.
these are people that work with them or for them but are not official members.
to become a member of an italian-american mafia family people have to be italian or have italian parents.
he called a meeting with the other "mafiosi" (plural: italian language for mafia members) from all over the us and made the rules that are still used today.
the five families over the years.
the band is a very dangerous force to the people who like it and to world governments.
even though their fans often die or are hurt at the series, they still remain very popular.
there is also a secret group of people who work for the u.s.
the album will have many songs that played during the series and will have several special guests.
into our dark house she comes,
pride means having a feeling of being good and worthy.
the word "pride" can be used in a good sense as well as in a bad sense.
in a good sense it means having a feeling of self-respect.
people can be satisfied with their achievements.
they can be proud of something good that they have done.
they might be proud of their son or daughter or husband or wife or anyone else who is close to them and who has done something good.
people can be proud of their country.
this might mean that someone has no respect for what other people do, only respect for what he or she does.
the ring of fire goes straight though new zealand.
in total there are 12 lines.
these rides must be used within 30 days after the first ride.
it is different from all other lines.
there are also 10 stations above the ground and 3 on bridges.
in even earlier times, around 500, there was a thing hill nearby, which was later swept away by the floods of the river lech.
it is one of the most famous of the pokémon.
most of its attacks have to do with hitting the enemy with some sort of fire attack.
it was also made into a musical called "spamalot".
if and only if
it is considered by some to be the most difficult.
he is perhaps best known for running the difficult western states 100 mile race seven years in a row.
it was an empire made up of many different peoples and great power.
it also had a say in things that affected both it and the rest of the empire.
this had been going on for many years and it led to hungarian separation.
this was the start of world war i.
wisdom is knowing things that help a person to live sensibly and make good decisions.
some say that wisdom is something a person learns as they grow older.
if someone has wisdom we say he is wise.
most cultures from the past have had special people who were supposed to be wise.
people asked them for advice when they had problems because they knew things that ordinary people did not know or could not know.
there are many stories in western culture in which the owl is supposed to be a wise bird.
many people say it is the most important "two-mile" horse race in the world.
the event is one of the most popular events to watch in australia.
four thousand people watched the race.
that is the smallest number in the history of the cup.
many animals eat faeces, either their own or that of other animal groups.
building started in 1860 and the first part of it was opened in 1863.
a problem is a situation which is difficult to deal with.
the way to solve it is called a "solution".
"john has locked his car keys inside his car so that he cannot get at them.
some problems are made up for fun.
in three years time he will be twice as old as mary.
how old are john and mary?"
they were sure samuel had done it.
why did they not call the police?"
it is located at the north shore of the lake of constance.
the city is famous for having one of the first zeppelins.
the number 666 is also sometimes thought to be the number of satan.
there is no reason to think this found in the bible, although it does mention in prophecy (rev.
the strength of the family can be seen in the first 1947 constitution of pakistan, where the cheema tribe was listed in the second line, as one of the forty largest families coming into pakistan.
they are called part of a mix of other war-like tribes from the northwest.
you have brought only one son into the world, but everyone in this land can be called an alexander”"
alexander was struck by his spirit.
it is believed that the mountain is harder to climb than mount everest because of its very bad weather.
he went to school at the city of london school and st.
amis spent his last years living with his first wife and her third husband.
he had made spain the most powerful country in europe.
some of the ideas of the roman republic are still used today.
they both had been in the second triumvirate.
they made it to give each other power.
each person helped the others to be more powerful.
it was made in 60 bc.
caesar won at the battle of pharsalus.
the sheep are known for their fine wool.
the water is then left to evaporate.
most of these animals are birds.
the color tells how much salt there is left in the water.
green colors come from special algae.
scientists use it to tell how much table salt there is in water.
this means that the food treated that way will go bad (spoil from bacteria) later that if it had not been treated that way.
the two are joined together and form atp.
it was written in the form of an autobiography.
the last time he was measured was on january 15 of 2005.
they have a very short tail.
usually they have a very hard exoskeleton.
this means they are well protected against predators.
it can be said that he was the first president of all of those counties.
they must be cut from time to time.
it is not painful when you cut your nails.
this means they can move by themselves.
if it can move on its own it is called motile.
it is based on students learning by doing different things which are about what they are learning.
this painting by rembrandt is so well known that it would be difficult for a thief to sell it.
they live by themselves and feed on roots and shrubs.
medication can be bought at a pharmacy to remove them but usually they will go away on their own.
warts are usually not dangerous to a person's health but they can be passed to other people.
getting rid of a wart that way can take up to 12 weeks.
sometimes this can be very painful.
it cannot be done with all warts.
she is the youngest person to climb to the top of mount everest.
he got the title grand master on august 12 2002, when he was only 12 years 7 months old.
he sang many of his early songs when he called himself "cat stevens".
this was the highest amount possible by law and the judge thought bushido could not afford that.
and i wont let that be taken away from a judge nor the law.
it was first called the country party when it started in 1922 and then became the national country party in 1975.
oil well is a way that people get oil from the ground.
people make a hole deep in the ground and then take oil from the hole.
oil has many uses, but it can be a bad thing for the environment.
a prairie is a flat area of land with not much rain.
they may also take longer to reach maturity.
they are easily confused with the bee.
some people are allergic and could die if stung by a wasp.
some of them may cause cancer.
it is sold in stores, and many people use it to look beautiful.
people who criticised the way the country was being ruled were punished.
the politicians wanted music and art to be easy to understand and to show how great their country was.
if it was too difficult to understand it was called “formalist” and that composer was not allowed to have his music performed.
when shostakovich wanted to put his real feelings into his music he had to be careful how he did it so that he did not offend the politicians.
two days later there was an article in the official government paper "pravda".
their music was called “formalist”, “anti-democratic” and lots of other things which actually had nothing to do with music.
there was nothing the composers could do except to say how sorry they were.
for the next five years shostakovich was careful not to write anything the politicians would not like.
some of his other compositions in which he expressed his real feelings he kept in a drawer so that no one could see them.
he suffered less from official repression.
he was persuaded to sign them so that the politicians would leave him in peace.
he had poliomyelitis which made it difficult for him to use his hands and legs.
he suffered several heart attacks and started to lose his sight.
he had no difficulty in playing any of his works on the piano, even music written for an orchestra.
he often played his music too fast and without much expression.
he hated having to talk to people he did not know.
he was always very polite and very kind to everyone he met.
he was very careful not to criticize musicians who asked him for advice.
he said very little, but what he said was carefully thought out.
he wrote lots of letters to the authorities to try to help his friends.
he was very reliable and always tried to arrive everywhere on time.
in his last years he found it very difficult to use his hands because of his illness but he always insisted on writing down his music himself.
what is on the other side of the object can be seen through it.
the image you can see through a transparent object is similar to the image you can see without it.
this could change the size of the image or change its shape.
if some light can be seen through an object but some of the detail of the image is lost, it is a translucent material.
some parts of it are in pakistan, and parts of it are in the republic of india.
a rug is a thick cloth that is used to cover a floor.
it has events that came from the handling of cattle, and the riding and training of horses.
change is the money returned after paying for something with more money than it costs.
change can also mean any kind of money in coin form.
the bus does not give money back.
homework is school work that students are given at school to do at home.
this depends on how old they are and how intelligent they are.
most of the time, people use it as a flavoring so that it helps make a food taste better.
the word undergraduate is also used to describe things about first degrees.
students need to choose their main subjects before they join the university by taking a test named a "vestibular".
it is like this because undergraduate education was first taught the same in both countries.
this is to be more gender-neutral.
in the us law and medicine can only be taught a graduate subjects.
they also are used to take care of the body.
a yard is a measure of length.
in the united states, people use yards more than they use meters.
if it vibrates in a regular way it will make a musical note because it will make the air vibrate.
this vibration will send sound waves to the ear and to the brain.
they balance who much the insurer might have to pay out against the chances of having to pay out
this view was rejected at first.
his family did not have a lot of money.
it lets electricity pass through it better in the light than in the dark.
this form is used in photocells.
he kept the tumor in a jar and brought it on the show.
the light side is used for good things like healing.
the people who study and learn the light side of the force are called "jedi".
the dark side can seem stronger but that is just because a person who uses the dark side of the force does not have to hold anything back, he is not restrained.
they keep and defend the peace of the galaxy.
many of the people belonging to those communities have lived in the city for many generations.
it appears that the object has two closed contours.
it does not have inside or outside, but just one of them.
in geometry, a side is a line that is part of a flat figure made from straight lines.
te puke is a small town in the bay of plenty in new zealand.
lots of other fruit is grown there too.
a valley is made deeper by a stream of water or a river as it flows from the high land to the lower land, and into a lake or sea.
a place where a valley is very narrow and has high walls is sometimes called a "gorge".
many of the people of the world live in valleys because there is often a river or stream in a valley for fresh water, and there is often good soil in a valley to grow crops.
there are always valleys in hills and mountains, in between the highest parts which are the "peaks".
if the mountains are very high, then people who want to travel to the other side of the mountains must go by the valleys.
a valley that is used for people to travel through the mountains is called a "pass".
there are many valleys like this in hills and mountains all over the world.
water running down from the hillsides often carries soil that spreads out across the valley, making flat land that is good for growing food crops and raising cattle and other animals.
the "tributaries" carry water from the hills or mountains that may be far from the main river.
after heavy rain, lots of water rushes into the main river so that it rises and floods over the flat floor of the valley.
when the flood waters spread, they drop lots of soil which has washed down from the hills.
the soil that drops on the valley floor makes the valley flatter.
many countries do not have any glaciers.
the snow and ice starts to move down a valley that has been made by a fast-flowing stream.
some of the deepest valleys in the world were made by glaciers.
sometimes a valley has been formed in the hills near the coast of a country.
the shape of the valley can still be seen from the tops of the hills that stick out from the water.
some of the hills may become islands, and others become the shore of a bay.
that way it is possible to make a two dimensional image of the whole surface of the earth.
it is the same for all maps.
it has not changed much since then.
they can also be all black.
people who look after borzois have done an good job of stopping health problem.
they were given to those who did something special for the tzars.
a few were taken from the country.
he led a group called the red shirts through the kingdom of two sicilies to bring together the kingdoms of italy in 1860.
edward had promised to each of them that they would be king.
world war iii is the name given to a possible third world war.
this could destroy much of the earth and kill most living things.
this shows that he believed that after world war iii, civilization as we know it will be gone.
he has been in many movies.
he is famous all around the world.
they used to be a lot bigger than they are now.
they need the blood to give them protein so they can make eggs.
it is like a thick syrup.
this can be made into sugar.
there are also therapies that can help people live easier with tourette's.
this means that one plant lives for one year only.
it can grow close to the ground.
then it will not grow larger than 20 cm.
or it can grow all upright.
this is because the single side would go to infinity.
in europe, the word is very often used to talk about people whose ancestors were african.
when talking about ecology, a habitat describes the place where many animals or plants of a certain kind of animals or plants live.
many different kinds of animals or plants can share the same habitat.
long island is a large island in new york.
to the north is the long island sound and to the south is the atlantic ocean.
they found what we call now indians, and then they became friends and traded.
it was created to promote and protect the science of astronomy by getting different nations to work together.
obfuscation is usually used when people either do not know what they are talking about or wish to hide their meaning.
the name refers to the part of the seven years' war that was fought in what is now the united states and canada.
it grows just like normal hair.
it is believed that sif was a goddess of the home, of field and of the crop.
it is also said that she had some control of destiny.
it is often seen as important for everyone to be treated equally, fairly and with dignity.
some words have been used for many years in ways which may have been unkind to some people.
sometimes these words have now been replaced by other words that are not offensive.
some of the new politically correct words are often criticized for being rather ridiculous.
people also say that things that are obviously bad are called by something else which hides the fact that they are bad.
words alone cannot be good or bad.
it is the way in which they are used that determines whether people feel they are good or bad.
the important thing is to treat everyone with respect.
it was believed to be able to knock down giants and entire mountains with only one hit.
other stories say that it fell to earth like a meteorite.
it was not just about destruction.
"...he (thor) would be able to strike as firmly as he wanted, whatever his aim, and the hammer would never fail, and if he threw it at something, it would never miss and never fly so far from his hand that it would not find its way back, and when he wanted, it would be so small that it could be carried inside his tunic."
an orphan is a child that has lost his or her parents.
sometimes parents get sick and die while their child or children are still young, and if no close relatives take care of them, if they cannot or will not do so, they are normally raised in an orphanage.
when several children, brothers or sisters are left orphaned they are normally split up; one child going to one family or one child going to a foster family while another may stay in the orphanage.
this can be a very bad experience for the children who don’t want to be divided.
sometimes parents may not have jobs or money and abandon their children because they cannot afford to bring them up.
the parents may feel that if someone else brings them up they may have a better future in the long run.
in many poor countries orphans are often seen wondering about begging for money and food; many may not be going to school.
but in richer countries many organisations and institutions help the orphans and work to helping parents when they are sick or very poor so they don't abandon their children.
the opera has nothing to do with shakespeare’s play macbeth except for the fact that it is about a woman who is tempted to commit a murder.
it was very successful and lots of people came to hear it.
he did not allow people to express their own personal feelings.
anything that he did not like was called “formalist”.
if stalin did not like someone that person would not be allowed to work.
they might even get sent to prison in siberia where they were treated very badly.
shostakovich had to be very careful what he said otherwise he could have been in big trouble.
he never spoke in public about music and culture.
the music in this symphony was easier to understand than the music he had been writing before which had a lot of atonal music.
he had to agree to say this so that he would be allowed to carry on composing.
when zinovy goes away on business boris forces her to swear to be faithful (not to make love to any other man while her husband is away).
it is hard to know why stalin decided he did not like the opera.
it may have been because the police are made to look silly.
it may have been because it showed people being sent to siberia.
wars are sometimes fought over border disputes.
sometimes the word is used to mean something that can mean several things or that is unclear.
hearing what the words are is often hard as the music is so loud and the singers often growl or roar rather than sing.
no one knows why she died.
the first was the holy roman empire.
the third was the third reich.
he was trying to make a link with the earlier holy roman empire which had once been very strong.
these words were later used by the nazis to make themselves appear stronger.
his mother came from a wealthy family in lincolnshire.
he went to a private school for a short time.
his next work was a part of a collection of works in which various authors wrote about their schooldays.
once war came, the long hours stopped any thought of writing a lot.
war service gave him a lot of material for later use.
powell’s military service gave him the basic ideas for these three novels.
it was completed in may 1946.
it is home to the thunderbirds.
much of the base is undeveloped.
the base has three main areas.
each team has 5 players on the court or floor at a time.
many think she was good at it.
the center of the city has become modern and is well developed.
it is used for carrying a light load over great distances.
paradise (or often called heaven) is a place where you have a good time and many things are there when you need it.
applewhite convinced 38 followers to kill themselves so that their souls could ride on a spaceship they believed was hiding behind the comet.
there was a city here in roman times, that they called "divodurum".
the romans controlled this city for a long time as an important center in gallia, but it was captured by attila the hun in 451.
soon after that it was taken over by the franks.
it may mean many things, and a lot of people have that name.
a few very large ones may hit the earth.
meteorites which are smaller than this are too weak to be used.
the two stations that want to communicate will have to keep in touch all the time as they never know when the next burst of communication will come.
this was because the message was reflected on the way, so it did not travel in a straight line (i.e.
it can be used as a keylogger which can see what you are typing into the internet.
the best protection is to get a program that protects against spyware.
addition means the tail of one vector is placed at the same point as the head of the other vector.
the sum vector is the one whose tail is the tail of the first vector and whose head is the head of the second.
prisoner of war
prisoners of war also have rights.
males are easily recognized, they have two horns above their eyes and one horn on their nose.
it is done to make oxygen continue to reach the heart and the brain.
the most common cause for a stopping heart is a heart attack.
other animals may have more stages.
there are between 40 and 50 different kinds of yucca.
all come from the hot and dry places in north and central america, as well as the carribean.
they have a very special way of pollination.
the ground beneath the equipment will not be hard in case a child falls.
it might be the most famous rock concert and festival ever held.
the festival was called "woodstock", because it was supposed to be in the town of woodstock, in ulster county; but the town would not give a place for such a large event, because they thought that over a million people would come.
a place was found in the town of wallkill, but when people who lived there were against it, the event was almost cancelled.
after two days of rain, there was deep mud in many places.
even though this may not have been the most comfortable place, the crowd kept up kindness and good cheer among themselves.
this mail appears to come from a bank or other service provider.
an overdose is when someone takes too much of a certain drug.
what to do with people who had an overdose.
if someone is thought to have had an overdose it is important to get them to a doctor, or hospital.
it can be very hard to see what kind of drug was taken.
this was the fourth war between the two neighbours.
the blood is forced to flow to the brain.
when he was young, he lived with his mother and his brother.
by the end of 1916, the war was going badly for great britain.
he was to take a seat in the house of lords, but he died before he could do so.
big ben is the second bell in the tower.
some believe it got its name from sir benjamin hall.
it took 13 years to build and it was completed in 1856.
so they do not have to be stored in petrol.
there is no proof that it exists.
others believe that life started on a small number of planets and spread to other planets.
it writes things against what he considers cults.
there is a cost to join the school.
this is what leaders of the islamic faith came to be called.
it is also found as a personal name in some countries.
it is to be found at the edge of the odenwald mountains and near to the river rhine.
a false prophet is a person who claims to be a prophet but really is not.
false prophets try to deceive people and bring them away from god.
there are many false prophets in the bible.
(many countries that now have democracy decide to keep their historical king or emperor as a way to celebrate their history and culture).
the amount of power belonging to the emperor of japan has changed a lot throughout japanese history.
it slowly increased its power over its neighbors.
this led to a more centralized state made up of almost all of the central areas of what is now japan.
while the emperor does serve as head of state, many people question if the emperor is a true monarch in a political sense.
he had to write music for the royal chapels.
he wrote some very fine anthems.
homophony means music in which the voices or instruments sing or play chords.
there is a tune on top and the lower parts are the accompaniment.
in homophonic music it is easy to hear the words that are being sung.
they are also not allowed to own anything.
some monasteries were built in places far away from where other people lived.
the monks spend a lot of time in prayer and they also go on missions.
he has been the leader since 1994.
he was the first leader of the country to be chosen by belarus citizens.
the throat is connected to the mouth at the top and to the stomach at the bottom.
the word safe has more than one meaning.
biogeography is the science on where animals live or had lived and why they go to live there.
there are many reasons why animals change their homes.
others study how insects live and reproduce, because we do not know very much about some kinds of insects.
he continued to be king for 56 years until he died in 1272.
here is the top of the medal table at the end of the games.
he was taught law and philosophy.
he has an equally large place in both the history of philosophy and the history of mathematics.
sometimes he even wrote in verse.
the world people live in is the worst possible world.
they believe that joseph smith was a prophet who restored the church jesus christ set up on earth when he was alive.
they teach that they are the only church with a fullness of the gospel and that all others are incomplete.
they also believe that the father, son and holy spirit are three separate individuals but all have the same mission.
today the center of the church is in utah, but there are more than 13 million members living all over the world.
mormons believe that it is important for families to spend a lot of time together, and that after they die, they can live together forever.
they meet once a week on sunday for church, where they have the sacrament and listen to short talks or sermons.
they also have sunday school to learn more.
the church also has activities during the week.
these are the most holy buildings in their religion.
after a temple has been dedicated, only mormons that are living good lives can go in the temple.
only the god týr was brave enough to feed the growing monster.
they tried to chain it up.
he agreed to be chained two times.
both times he easily broke the chains.
he agreed to try and break the chain only if one of the gods would his hand in the wolf's mouth.
he believed this would force them to free him if he could not break the chain.
he will join forces with the enemies of the gods and will then eat odin.
this causes more blood to be sent to the kidneys.
they often had a house of arms.
this form of title is known as the order of the british empire.
when asked by his father how he knew numbers and letters, he said he learned them from "sesame street".
all of them have one or more suckers.
period instruments are musical instruments which have been made in the same way that they were hundreds of years ago so that old music will sound like it used to when it was first composed.
musical instruments have changed a lot during the last few centuries.
these changes often gave the instruments a bigger sound so that they could be heard well in big concert halls.
during the 20th century musicians started to realize that the way we play the music of bach and other composers from the past was making the music sound rather different from the way it would first have been heard.
very few of the old instruments still existed and those that had survived had been “modernized”.
the keys were added in the 18th century and it made it much easier to play difficult music with lots of sharps and flats.
brass instruments like the trumpet and french horn now have valves which make it easier to play in different keys.
this makes a very different sound.
does old music sound better on period instruments?
musicians do not all agree about this question and they still argue a lot about the way that some of the music should be played.
however, it is important to listen to the way that period instruments are played.
they live on the outside of their host.
this means that they have both sexes.
almost all of them are aquatic.
it was built by the æsir and is guarded by the god heimdall.
only the thunder god thor was not allowed to use the rainbow, because he may break it.
they are usually made from dough.
from here they can attack the humans in midgard and the gods in asgard.
he mother died giving birth to her and her brother.
the twins were taken at birth and given to different families to raise.
when he was four years old, he first got into a kart.
because he was a lot lighter than the other racers, he was much faster than all of them.
it started to rain harder and the race was stopped on the 31st lap.
they came together and created what they called the black belt society.
this system gained its name ("kajukenbo") from the first letters of the four systems of which it is made up.
kajukenbo has developed slowly into a system open to act of improving and ready to accept what is efficient.
there was a big trouble about the person, who should fellow him.
bullets made from it will burn when they hit something hard, and their smoke is dangerous to breathe.
this is because they are more expensive to make and to buy.
quality is how good something is.
if the quality of something is high then that means that the product is very good, and if the quality of a item is low that means that the product is not really good.
usually high quality thing cost a lot of money an low quality things do not really cost much money.
in other words things that are low quality are cheap.
it is used to get water away from a building, when it rains.
a long time ago people believed that they scared away evil spirits.
construction of the first parts of the city was finished in the late 1980s.
anne's body still had a shroud wrapped around her and there was still red hair on her skull.
it is near the town of warwick.
there are many room in the castle.
some of the rooms have mannequins in them that look like real people.
they are used to show how people might have lived in the castle hundreds of years ago.
lights and sounds are used to add to the effect.
it can be explored, so that visitors can see from where the guards looked for enemies.
it is possible to see the private chambers, or bedrooms, where the family and their most important guests slept.
this makes it very easy to see from the main shopping streets.
it is a very beautiful castle.
he is best known for the research he did on human sexuality.
he wondered, how much difference there was in the way different people had sex with each other.
many people see him as the father of sexology.
people said that the selection of those asked was not well done.
people also say that child abuse may have been involved when collecting the data.
an explosion, pressure does not have to be present but is always a result of an explosion.
it is silver white and hard.
it is the most expensive precious metal.
pieces of indium can easily be joined together by pushing one piece into another.
it has been used in some murders.
he thought that the story would make a good opera.
he made a few changes to the story: he left out a some characters, changed the order of the story a little, and made the humans and the animals behave in a similar way.
she is tied up with a rope in the yard.
one day he finds a dead hare.
he tells the young cub that she looks just like her mother.
he did not have all the characters that are in the cartoon, and he changed the order of the story to make it more dramatic.
the disease is caused by certain viruses most of the time, but can also be cause by bacteria.
this is most often caused by viruses, but may also be caused by bacteria.
some may consider pro-metaphase as part of the phases but most believe it is part of metaphase and some of the end of prophase.
one would still have the nucleus and the other would lack a nucleus.
this work is planned for 2014.
it was at the end of a branch line from the main line at holborn.
some of these instruments survive to this day.
they are some of the best and most expensive violins.
it is used to take picture of inside the body.
it makes the images clearer because it makes the difference in the concentration of water in different parts of the body look more clear (more contrast) in the picture that is made.
a daughter of zeus and demeter.
she was kidnapped by hades and he makes her eat a pomegranate which is the fruit of the underworld.
after she ate this fruit it was supposed to keep her in the underworld with hades so she would be forced to marry him.
in some versions she only ate 6 seeds from the pomegranate, so hades only made her stay 6 months of the year.
the other half are elected from a party list in each land.
the total number of seats a party gets depends on the number of the second "party votes" it gets.
but if a party is wins more constituency seats then its share of the party votes then it keeps those seats but extra land-list seats are created, to keep the percentage of seats correct.
the science that is concerned with finding out how this happened is called "paleoanthropology".
they also gathered what they could find - wild berries and nuts.
fire was very important during this time.
there have been many ice ages in the history of the world.
protecting against the cold is important.
early humans (as well as other animals) needed to come up with a way to protect themselves against the cold.
it may be the one of the earliest things that show the human form.
different kinds of stone, bones and ivory were used to make the figurines.
some are also made of clay which was then burned in a fire.
among the most famous are those in the caves of altamira in spain and lascaux in france.
the caves they were found in usually do not show signs that someone lived in them.
they say the people at that periods of time painted things differently.
they knew about perspective, and they knew of different ways to draw things.
they also were able to observe the behavior of animals they painted.
people also started to store foods so that they would have seed to plant rather than simply eat.
in some years there were surpluses that could be traded for other goods.
they did not happen in the same order though.
there are a a few standing stones and stone circles.
ancient history was the time from the development of writing to the fall of the roman empire.
this means that some people were able to stop growing crops and do other jobs, since enough crops were already grown.
this brought a split in society.
in sumer, only the sons of the rich and powerful learned how to read and write.
they went to a school called "edubba".
they are also thought to have invented the sailboat.
they are also known for writing in hieroglyphs, building the famous pyramids, other sorts of tombs and big temples and for their military.
there was slavery, but it is not clear how it was practiced.
the rulers of ancient egypt tried to keep their people happy by religion that made them respect the rulers and their past.
this can be documented by various things that were added to graves.
women were much better off than with the romans, they were almost equal to men.
greek culture had a very powerful influence on later civilizations, especially the romans.
when a city no longer had enough food to care for all its citizens, some people were sent out to set up a new city.
there were also many wars between different city states.
the middle ages was the time from the fall of the roman empire until the middle of the 15th century.
in the later middle ages, there was a plague called the black death.
a system called feudalism was a very important part of the middle ages.
the lords were the next in the pyramid.
this meant that when they had conquered one city, this had little influence on the whole empire.
tenochtitlan was one of the greatest cities of the world in that time.
the aztecs ate a lot of plants and vegetables that could be grown easily in the mexico area.
the main food that they ate was corn, which they called maize.
another food that they ate was squash.
it covered the area around cusco.
but then it became clear that he had different ideas about the church doctrine.
he thought that christians should only read the bible to find out what god wants from them.
these advances allowed people to produce much more than they needed for living.
they ruled from a place called edo.
new technology and different ideas led to many worldwide changes in the time of just 100 years.
these were causes that made it likely that a war would start in europe.
of all the wars ever fought, world war ii involved the most countries and killed the most people.
after world war ii the united nations was founded in the hope that it could solve arguments among nations and keep wars from happening.
people began to live longer because of better medicine and medical technology.
the bottom were for slaves captured in battle.
wealthy people were buried with less.
some of the richer people are more powerful.
they tell a lot about the people who built them.
in the east there is the main river.
people of these cities like to go there at holidays.
daylight saving time
dst helps stores that sell to people after they get off work, but it hurts farmers and others whose hours are set by the sun.
it is soft and can be cut with a knife.
the goal in rowing is to move as fast as possible on top of the water.
they move the boat forward by using two sculls or one oar.
the types depend on how many people are in the boat and if they have a coxswain or not.
the ink comes in special ink cartridges, which can be very expensive and uneconomical.
what lawrencium looks like is not known because not enough has been made to see it with human eyesight.
what darmstadtium looks like is not known because not enough has been made to see it with human eyesight.
this is shown by the equation below that is the reaction that happened.
they are treated with respect and are treated as part of the family.
they are given clothes and are changed at certain times every day.
they are also very powerful some people think that they are very holy.
when world war i started it seemed like a bad idea to have a city named after the capital of germany.
a spring is a point where water flows out of the ground.
a spring may flow the whole year or only sometimes.
this depends on the water getting into the ground all of the time (rain) or only once in a while (snow melting).
some springs produce water that is good for health reasons.
sometimes towns grow by these springs because many people who are ill come there to get better.
where a river is fed by more than one source, it is usual to regard the highest as its source.
it is found in nature on earth but is found in other parts of the universe.
the number of dots changes if there are less or more electrons.
a physical property is a property, quality or way that an object is.
a physical property can always be measured without changing or making the object chemically different or different in a way that would effect its chemical or atomic structure.
it is the way people see and understand something.
throughout each of the histories of the different groups there are strong signs of the continued merging of both chinese and japanese influences.
the word edge can stand for different concepts
they wanted to lock him up onto a chain.
but he broke every chain they tried to put on him.
so fenrir asked that one of them put his hand into his mouth.
he and his children became enemies of the gods in ragnarok.
the last evil thing he did is to kill the god baldur, using the blind god hodhr's hands.
it is also because loki is often confused with the fire giant logi.
she is the twin sister of freyr and the daughter of njord.
the valkyries collect the souls of heroes killed in battles and bring them to heaven, where they will become soldiers of the gods.
freyja often rides in a chariot pulled by big blue cats, or on a golden battle boar.
whenever she rides into battles, she gets half of the souls of dead heroes.
she has the power of prophecy, but she does not tell what she knows.
friday, the day of the week is named either after her or after freyja.
it was said that most of them will die at ragnarök.
it is about world war ii up till call of duty 4 which takes place in present times.
this is part of the standard model which is the best way that physics has to explain the particles.
it is also the biggest city that is not on the coast in victoria.
they took over large areas of land, with some farms more than 400 square kilometres.
with so many people coming to look for gold, the town soon got bigger.
he was the son of nine different mothers and was called the "white god".
his senses are so good that he can hear the grass grow and he can see to the end of the world.
he also does not need any sleep at all.
the giant fell down dead with his leg on the neck of thor.
the other gods came to lift the leg off of thor.
they were not strong enough to lift it.
he came to his father and lifted the leg off of him by himself.
some brass instruments are really made of wood, but are still called brass instruments, like the serpent.
they are not called brass instruments although they are made of brass.
the workers would play in the bands after work.
we take a bowl of water to which we add sugar crystals.
it is soft and silver color.
in nature it is found as a mix of seven stable isotopes.
it is made from the alpha decay of ununpentium.
what darmstadtium looks like is not known because not enough has been made to see it with human eyesight.
the new heart is taken from a dead person who doesn't need it any more.
she is considered a folksinger although her music has changed from folk a lot after the 1960s.
bay of plenty
usually they are used to print to paper which is very large in size.
this is much like a typewriter.
it was first built in 1925.
it is one of the oldest in the country.
he was replaced by des o'connor.
he is best known for his work on the microscope.
it is most common in the united states.
it is named after a girl named barbara.
some people believe barbie gives girls a wrong idea of what they will look like when they grow up.
she has dream houses and clothes.
she has many jobs from teacher to doctor to astronaut.
many people believe that the introduction of the barbie doll was wrong due to the fact that it made young girls believe that they had to become skinny in order to be just like barbie.
this means that the way they are made, and the region they come form are strictly regulated.
he wrote a lot of music for piano.
many of his piano pieces were harder to play than anything that had been written before.
when he was seven his father started to teach him the piano.
he was a child prodigy, and within a year or two he was already playing in concerts.
he fell in love with one of his pupils.
it was the first of many love affairs he had with various women.
he read a lot of books to try to educate himself properly.
they lived together for several years and had three children.
he still saw her and the children every summer for a few years but finally they separated completely.
he was famous everywhere he went.
she was to be the most important person in his life from then on.
she persuaded him to stop travelling all the time and spend his time composing.
during the next twelve years he wrote nearly all the great works for which he is famous.
he wrote a lot of religious music and took orders in the catholic church.
he could be very polite and knew how to get on with the aristocracy.
he could be very generous, giving both money and time to other musicians and giving praise where it was deserved.
sometimes he made it sound like an orchestra.
he often made difficult transcriptions which meant that he changed the pieces and added a lot of extra ornamental notes, making a new piece out of an old one.
he wrote a lot of church music.
he was always looking for a spiritual meaning to life.
it used to be called wikicities, and the name was changed to wikia on march 27 2006.
originally, it was italian but now it can be found all over the world.
people sometimes brought their horses into family tent for shelter and protection.
it also was used as a war horse.
other arabian horses were captured in war and taken to other countries outside of the middle east.
arabians needed to live on very little food, and survive a dry climate that was very hot in the day but very cold at night.
weak horses did not live, and the horses who survived the desert also had to survive being ridden for war.
a rule of the food chain is that when moving closer to the consumers the amount of energy and food is less.
it is sometimes said the babies are in the mother's stomach, but it is better to say they are inside the mother's womb, which is not where food goes.
another important change in the study of microrganism has come from the discovery of dna and rna, because now it is possible to change the inside of a cell without killing it using a vector.
this can cause death or serious disease.
in about 1749, the family moved to a house in the city of zaragoza.
he may have suffered from dementia.
it is also thought that he may have been poisoned by lead paint.
some of the walls of the house are painted with strange dark pictures, but it is not sure whether goya did them.
they show a change in his art.
these were not published until more than 30 years after his death.
it is more likely a picture of the way that war destroys people.
one of the things that made the hellenistic time different from other times was the division of alexander the great's country into smaller parts.
in every part there was a family of leaders.
every family of leaders gave money for art in a way that was different from the way the city-states did it.
they made big cities and complex groups of buildings in a way that most city-states had already stopped doing by 500 bc.
this way of making buildings was new for greece.
this way was not to try to change or fix a natural place, but to make the buildings fit the natural place.
different attalid kings added to it and made a huge group of buildings.
the agora is the beginning of a street which goes through the whole acropolis.
on the east and top of the rock are the buildings of the organizers, leaders and soldiers.
one of the biggest ones is the one with the pergamon altar which is called "of the gods and of the giants" and is one of the most beautiful pieces of greek sculpture.
at that time they liked to make very big things.
their mother gaia, come to their aid, can do nothing and must watch them twist in pain under the blows of the gods.
his taste for
at some times in the past, or in some places today, it has been illegal to make a person pay interest on a loan.
if the interest that a person must pay is too high, this is called usury.
interest can also be the care or concern that someone has for something or someone.
this is also true for someone who shares a right with others, or a person who has a future right to something.
it also can mean to cause something to die in this way.
surveys say that 10% of children under 5 have been through a situation where they could have drowned.
it is the night when the sun sets earliest and rises latest the next day.
the wiccan ritual includes thanking the goddess for the past year and asking for a happiness in the year to come.
macedonia is the name of two areas in europe
her father owns a restaurant and a fast food business in motherwell.
she has to sneak away during lunch breaks to meet her lover sam loomis, and they cannot get married because sam has to spend most of his money on alimony.
there are also often dark shadows on the movie scenes, even on the faces of the actors.
the person watching the movie has to decide if they think that a hero who does both good and bad things is a good person or not.
a good man with a wife might need money for their rent, and borrow the money from a criminal gang leader, because the good man has no other way of getting the money.
then the bad gang leader might force the good man to do bad things to pay back the money.
then the good man has to decide between protecting his wife or doing a bad crime.
people who watch film noir movies like to see stories about people who have to make hard choices, or people whose lives have sad things happen in them.
real life is not all happy and perfect like in romantic films; people often have to make hard choices or have sad things happen.
this way, they know whether the train must stop or may continue.
maitland is sometimes called the largest city, that is not on the sea in new south wales.
it was a relative of hypsilophodon.
it has lots of relatives such as zephyrosaurus.
it was thought to climb trees.
it was thought to be a young iguanodon but later noticed to be a different animal.
it was thought to be a relative of hypsilophodon but later considered as a relative of iguanodon.
but it actually is a relative of ceratosaurus.
it has a small relative named coelophysis.
the amount of people living in the city changes the amount of skyscrapers built in the city.
together with people from the sa they were used as a police force.
when the player has to play with the bow again the word “arco” is written in the music (“arco” is the italian word for “bow”).
sometimes two fingers can be used for really fast bits.
it is easy to play a bowed note and then immediately a plucked note if the bowed note finished near the heel of the bow (the end where the bow is held).
it can take a little more time to go back to bowing again because the player has to get the bow back into playing position.
if there is a long pizzicato section then it is more comfortable to put the bow down instead of holding it in the right hand all the time.
this is fine so long as the player has time to pick the bow up again when it goes back to arco.
high notes sound very short and dry.
if you listen to a symphony it may often be divided into four movements.
at other times the conductor or performer will want to go almost straight on with hardly any break.
sometimes the composer shows that there should be no break at all between movements.
it lies on the river rhine.
worms is among the oldest cities in germany.
a sex toy is a device that helps humans get more pleasure when they have sex or when they masturbate.
it was a relative of archaeopteryx.
the name comes from the greek goddess aphrodite.
he will either do this by stepping on his jaw and tearing the wolf apart, or by driving a sword through the heart of the wolf.
it was a relative of coelophysis.
it grew up to 4 feet long.
he inherited the disease from his mother.
his father was forced to give up the throne in 1917 and his family was murdered in ekaterinburg in 1918.
it was a relative of the iguanodon.
all of them live in areas that are at least partly covered with water.
there have been many more special coins made since the 1990s.
to make it had to copy these notes, they have see through windows with a picture image of captain james cook.
he was the first to explain how blood was moved through the body by the heart.
he became a doctor at st.
he said that blood was pumped around the body in a closed system.
blood was pumped by the heart through the body before coming back to the heart to repeat the process.
this went against what was believed at the time to be true.
it was thought at the time that the dark red blood found in veins came from the liver and the bright red blood found in arteries came from the heart.
it was believed that the liver and heart made the blood and it was used up by the body parts it was pumped to.
this showed him that the blood was not being used up.
he said blood flowed through the heart in two loops.
she helps do right and has logic.
she helps her friends and sibling get through school with fun involved.
potatoes were the main source of food for most of the people in ireland at the time.
a lot is not known about what happened during this time.
they also ate fruit and seeds.
this means that it only ate plants but could have eaten meat as well.
it had 3 different kinds of teeth.
it is letting air out of the stomach through the mouth.
it is believed that it destroyed the homes of 70,000 of the 80,000 people that lived in the city.
it is not known how many people died in the fire.
firefighters of the time usually made firebreaks by destroying buildings around the fire so it could not spread.
this did not happen soon enough because the lord mayor, sir thomas bloodworth, was not certain what to do.
the fire pushed north on monday into the center of the city.
the fire is said to have also helped to get rid of the great plague which had hit london in 1665, and killed about 70,000 of the 90,000 population.
this is helped by low temperatures.
he is best known for his role in.
impeachment in many places is part a process to remove government officials without that official wanting to leave his job.
in common law, an indictment is a charge saying that a person committed a very serious crime.
a trial is where 2 groups of people argue in a court.
for smaller crimes, there is often just a fine - money must be paid.
one of the reasons the disease stopped killing people was because of the great fire of london in 1666.
during the middle ages people started to write down stories more and more.
not all short people have this condition.
we can measure anything in moles, but it is not very useful for most things because the numbers are so big.
it was an omnivore, an animal that ate both meat and plants.
it would swim through schools of fish and use its long neck and sharp teeth to snap from side to side.
it still is being shown on television.
she is buried at the church of st.
a festival is a gathering of people to celebrate something.
this was called the han sythesis.
merchants used the silk road to reach china.
this theory told the people that kings had the order of the gods to rule the country (mandate of heaven).
for the first time in the history of china, large number of persons also moved from one area to other area for settlement.
he is best known for his work in black sabbath.
a battle is a fight between two or more groups where each group is trying to defeat (beat) the others.
he grew even more angry as time went on, because elizabeth's family became powerful and the king no longer respected warwick as he had done in the beginning.
they were also defeated in battle by king edward, and his throne was safe.
he would be the next king.
pterosaurs were flying reptiles that lived at the same time as the dinosaurs.
it was one of the largest animals to ever fly.
when it stood on the ground it was as tall as a giraffe.
since whedon had not planned to end "angel," he had to change the story and ending of both the final season and the series.
the series is about her trying to learn who she really is.
only two of his lines were kept in the final script of "x-men".
the story takes place in the far future of the buffyverse.
the first two issues sold out and went to a second printing.
these stories would take place after the final episode.
the best example is what he says is his habit of writing about "teenage girls with superpowers".
she was an adolescent girl finding out she has great power and dealing with it."
she accepted both male and female clients.
some are easy to notice other are more difficult.
this is very true in "buffy".
one member in the relationship will usually end up dying or turning evil.
there is a strong theme that family is the group of people that a person lives their life with, not the people that raised them as a child.
most of them are not around.
it was first believed to be an early ancestor of ceratosaurus; though later scientists discovered that it was actually an ancestor of the coelurosaurs.
the proceratosaurus usually grew up to 7 feet tall and 17 feet long.
if they catch the criminals alive then they get a reward.
later they would meet with others.
episode 5 seal of the brothers
episode 17 the edge of the world
the story is told by a man who calls himself “the professor”.
there are a lot of boomerang clubs in many countries all over the world.
yggdrasil has one of its roots in the spring of the river.
a prophecy is a claim on how the future will be like, which is not based on any ordinary source of information.
they are often hard to understand and need interpretation.
it had sharp teeth because it ate meat and plants.
book of job
the book of job is poetry.
he was the greatest man among all the people of the east."
one day satan and the angels of god went to god.
god tells satan about his servant job and how good he is.
satan says that the only reason why he is like that is because god was good to him and gave him sons and daughters and many animals.
satan asks if he can test job and god lets him.
god tells satan not to kill job.
the first test satan did was to take away all of job's animals, killing the servants that were with the animals, and killing all of job's sons and daughters while they were eating together.
even though satan did these things to job, job did not curse god like satan wanted job to do.
satan and the angels went to meet god again.
satan says that job will curse god if he makes job sick, which he did.
job told her that if he said that, that would be foolish.
even though job lost everything he had and suffered from painful sores all over his body, he did not sin against god by cursing him.
satan had failed in trying to make him sin.
this is the final time satan is mentioned in the book of job.
when job's friends heard about the things that happened to him they went to comfort him.
most of the book tells about job and his friends talking.
towards the end of the book, job's friends start to think that job is not good because a lot of bad things are happening to him.
job keeps on saying that he is good but he starts to wonder if god really is good.
after god speaks to job and his three friends, god gets furious at two of job's friends for thinking that job was not a good man.
god gives him more than he had before.
the song is sung at the start of the fa cup finals.
when other helpers fail and comforts flee,
change and decay in all around i see;
shine through the gloom and point me to the skies.
in the prayer, the person praying asks mary to step between themselves, and god and to put in a good word for them.
the article on hail mary in the catholic encyclopedia says that the hail mary was not used in this form before about 1050.
the word comes from the latin word "studium", which means to eagerly want something.
they sometimes walked out during recordings.
they played both old and new songs.
it also makes very good firewood.
the first woman was made from an alder.
this chosen one would then be called einherjars.
it had a big head with a very tall beak.
it lived during the late cretaceous.
it lived at the same time as tyrannosaurus.
most of them are smaller in size.
it is also used to make charcoal.
it is not known very well.
it is different from the plesiosaur.
you can see it without a microscope.
the horn is a brass instrument.
it developed from the horns that some animals have on their heads.
horns were often used during hunting.
these early brass instruments were round so that the hunter could put his arm through it and carry it on his shoulder and blow it while riding a horse.
the riders could send messages to one another by blowing particular notes.
this made it possible to play lots of different notes.
when a note is played using the hand in the bell it makes the note sound different: more muffled (a bit like speaking while covering your mouth with your hand).
another way to change the notes on a horn was to use crooks.
horns are part of the body of some animals.
animals often use their horns for fighting one another.
thousands of years ago people used the horns of dead animals for musical instruments (see horn (musical instrument)).
its history is almost as old as that of beer.
her name means strength in old norse.
most of them are like grave stones.
a balcony is a kind of floor at a certain height, which stands out from the building.
the caucasus mountains are commonly known as a line between asia and europe, and the lands in caucasia are different considered to be in one or both continents.
he was a redemptorist priest known for having a deep faith in god and a deep love of mary.
he would make his head touch the floor and pray to her daily, and while dying he would pray to her throughout the day.
during this time he stayed devoted to god, moving back to quebec to be a priest there.
before his death he was in constant pain, and would spend his days in prayer.
i want to go to heaven... to see you and mary," after this he got up and sang the magnificat in a loud voice.
it is one of the oldest churches in armenia.
in the beginning of the 1920s, a lot of soldiers who fought in world war i bought cars when they returned home from the war.
people started to see that having a car would make traveling much easier.
so everything is set out beforehand.
it was thought to be a dinosaur with a sail like the spinosaurus but people later found out that it was a four legged animal.
it had a two meter high sail on its back like dimetrodon.
it lived in the late cretaceous.
they grew up to 50 inches.
rather than have the church become divided, they needed a way to list what the church believed.
there are several festival each year in ojiya.
he did many bad things against the gods and goddesses.
at a banquet, he tried to feed people the flesh of his son pelops.
he had asked the gods and goddesses to come to this banquet.
tantalus's punishment while he was alive was the ruin of his kingdom.
he was made to stand in a pool of water up to his chin for all time.
each time tantalus lowered his head to drink the water he was standing in, the water would lower.
over his head hung branches of trees filled with fruit.
when he would try to get them, wind would blow them out of his reach.
he went to greece and became the ruler of the peninsula which still has his name, the peloponesus.
some battles in wars are called campaigns.
as he says it, his legend started at the waters of lake titicaca, when he was told by the sun god to go east to set up his empire.
leigh was considered to be very beautiful and this sometimes meant that she thought that she was not taken seriously as an actress.
these meant that her career went through period of decline and that she was sometimes considered difficult to work with.
from the time of john the evangelist and paul of tarsus there has always been in the church something like devotion to the love of god, but there is nothing to indicate that, during the first ten centuries of christianity, any worship was rendered to the wounded heart of jesus.
one particular image has been used as part of a set, along with an image of the blessed virgin mary.
it was in the group of pterodactyloidea.
it is around an hour away from boston.
the rider can perform freestyle where they make up their own pattern and ride it to music.
she fought against the british policy of taking kingdoms of rulers with no children to rule after them.
she had a son named damodar.
after killing the dragon, he bathed in its blood and so changed his skin, so that he could not be wounded any more.
but before he is allowed to marry her he has to help gunther to win against brünhild, the queen of iceland.
he does it with the help of a cloak which lets him become invisible.
some of his citizens did not like his religious ideas, leading a group of them to disobey and fight against him.
after his defeat at the battle of the boyne in the summer of 1690, he returned to france, living the rest of his life under the protection of king louis xiv.
to manifest something means to show it, or to make it clear or to make it known.
it usually tells a story from the old testament.
unlike most of his other oratorios, the story is not from the old testament.
it tells the story of the birth, life and death of jesus.
it jumped out of the water.
it is usually larger than a cigarette.
his followers consider him a messenger of god.
a person writes a will and testament before they die, and usually writes what they want to happen to their money and their things after they die.
it is sometimes called a last will and testament.
while a knot is often made from rope, it can also be made from many other things.
after the napoleonic wars it became part of the kingdom of hanover.
almost anything can be bought and sold there.
they are based in new york.
the a 45 ends in bavaria.
they have a difference of 1 between every two numbers.
they have a difference of 2 between every two numbers.
they have a difference of 2 between every two numbers.
beowulf attacked him without his sword and tore the arm off the beast.
a clan is a group of people who - following a tradition - belong to the same kin.
the only problem is that the reaction is not stable, so it does not last a long time, because the muons are lost.
this process is still a long way from being used for business.
this has required a moving lifestyle in the past, so it has been more convenient to move from place to place rather than to settle in one place.
someone with coprolalia will use words that make people feel uncomfortable so often that it is hard to control.
it comes free of charge for 30 days and then you have the choice to have it for $20 usd.
the source of all evil is vanquished by the power of three in the fourth season of the show.
they weigh between three to five kilograms.
they are active at night and sleep on trees in the daytime.
examples of waves include sound waves and light waves.
an example of how refraction works is placing a straw in a cup of water, with part of the straw in the water.
this is because of the bending of light rays as they move between the air and the water.
a good and simple way to understand how light works is to think of it like a car.
he also had a sister called edith.she was married to the king so he was his brother in law
he worked at 3 churches there.
he is also a member of the the fellowship of saint john.
he was replaced by the rt.
the sun is the star and the largest object in our solar system.
our sun can be seen in the sky in the day time.
it is a large yellow ball.
even though the sun is very far from the earth, we still feel this energy.
the sun is so bright that it can hurt to look at it and can damage your eyesight so never stare at the sun and never use binoculars or a telescope to look at it.
it is made of small particles that fly away from the sun.
the sun is the main source of energy for life on earth.
people can look at the sun if they use special lenses that make it safe.
the number of sunspots on the sun gets bigger and then smaller in a cycle of about 11 years.
at the center of that huge cloud, some of the material started to build up into a ball.
at that point, the sun blew away all the rest of the cloud from itself, and the planets formed from the rest of this cloud
the sunspots only look dark because the rest of the sun is very bright.
this is because the moon has moved right in front of the sun and blocks almost all of its light.
sign of the cross
the sign of the cross is a physical gesture made by catholics.
it is usually done at the beginning and ending of prayers.
it had no teeth in its long mouth, and it had a small pouch like a pelican at the back of its jaw.
it was named athlete's foot because it was common in people who play sports or get exercise.
the word back has several meanings.
reflection is the change in direction of a wave at a boundary between two different media, so that the wave moves back into the same medium from which it came from.
the most common examples include the reflection of light, sound and water waves.
it is called a sea because when the romans first arrived there, they tasted the water and found it to be salty.
civil rights are rights that all people in the same country should have.
the rights are given by the laws of the country.
it is thought that it would be a hard metal.
now his hair is black again and a bit longer, because he said it was annoying to try and keep it the same.
he recently said that he will be expecting his first child, with his wife lyn-z, in the summer of 2009.
he said that he was not allowed to play outside much when he was younger.
while not being able to play in the park, he created his own imaginary world in his head.
this led to his love for artwork.
after he got in trouble with the police, he announced his homosexuality.
sometimes the big prize is given for charity or there is no big prize at all.
they are often built in big buildings with a lot of floors.
many people there did not like the police.
as he was brought to a police car by two police men along railton road a large crowd attacked the police and the fight only ended when more police men arrived; the youth was taken to hospital.
throughout the day crowds slowly got together.
more police came and more things were thrown.
the police closed the atlantic-railton-mayall area from public, although many other streets had groups of rioting people as well.
two hours later the police had the area under some control, although the fire brigade returned at the next morning only.
there were tries to start violence again on the 12th, but they were stopped by more than 1,000 police men on the streets.
it was a relative of protarchaeopteryx.
this means if the programmer needs to change the code they can see the result of any changes quickly.
back to the future
back to the future is a movie.
when he helps his father, he accidentally changes the events that lead to his parents becoming a couple.
if he can get his parents back together, he has very little time to get back to the time machine/car to use the lightning strike to take the time machine and him (marty) back to the future.
back to the future part ii.
back to the future part iii.
he also believed that a "better consciousness" could be attained by denying the fulfilment our desires, taking time to think about who we really are and what we should do to avoid suffering - but also, in doing something few philosophers of his day spoke of: in making and looking at works of art, especially music, which he considered one of the few justifications for human existence.
they started when a group of lebanese men asked a white australian woman on a beach with a bikini on to cover up.
the family in question is that of the "pythonideae".
consultation is a special way of discussing problems and making decisions used by bahá'ís.
married people consult with their husband or wife to solve difficulties in the marriage.
it is used when both hello and goodbye would be used in english, though it has a very different meaning.
namaste is kind of like a praise to the person receiving the namaste
it carries water around a plant.
they are known for their very big strength.
another well known cause for amnesia can be drinking too much alcohol.
he became famous when he escaped the labyrinth using wings his father built.
he fell down in the sea and drowned.
madeleine fought in wars and had a husband named whistie, who was thought to have died in war from exposure to mustard gas.
he found the hudson river while looking for a way to get from north america to asia by water.
this was called the northwest passage.
she was the person who the audiences always want to see more of.
this is different from cold-blooded animals who need to move to warm places to become warm and move to cold places to be cold.
warm-blooded animals do not need to move to make them warm or cold.
it is given to show them how much it would cost to have the work done.
the cost can change depending on the tools, materials and how much work is needed to be done for each customer.
the challenge to level up does helps some people to continue playing because they like a challenge.
it is a four man group.
the car was first made in 1992.
only two people have won more times than prost.
during this time he won his first three championships.
the sides of the head and the area around the ears are not considered to be the back of the head.
fighters cannot purposely hang an arm or leg on the ropes and it will result in an immediate warning.
if we do not have formula_1...
scientists found that he had a very bad break of the leg and thought he died because it got infected.
the boy was riding home on his bicycle from his girlfriend's house when he saw a police car and thought it was chasing him.
police were searching him, but police have said that the police car was looking for a different person.
friends and relatives came together at the block to be sad.
fingering means: choosing which finger to use for each note when playing a piece on a musical instrument.
when learning to play a piece it is important to try to find a good fingering.
once a good fingering has been found it should always be used so that the piece is always played in the same way and the fingers learn “where to go”.
later this idea went out of fashion.
an organist playing on the pedals also needs to decide which foot to use for each note.
when these signs are placed above the note it means the right foot, below means for the left foot.
the fingers are numbered from 1 to 4 because the thumb is behind the neck of the instrument.
it is only the left hand which fingers the notes because the right hand is either plucking or bowing.
this makes them sound very light and airy.
finger 3 is just helping finger 4 to press down on the string.
it is difficult to play in tune like this, although it saves having to change the hand position so much.
on a piano, starting with the thumb and going along the fingers to the little finger means going to higher notes in the right hand and to lower notes in the left hand.
the little finger is not used in harp playing.
this means: fingers 1, 2 and 3 of the left hand and fingers 2 and 3 of the right hand.
this can be used to make it easier to play fast trills, but the usual fingering will sound better for normal notes.
it should also help the music to sound good e.g.
a piece is a bit of something.
if something can be cut or broken into several bits, these bits are called "pieces".
many people think it did this because it was filled with a gas called hydrogen which can catch on fire easily.
the rock group led zeppelin used a picture of the fire for cover of their first album.
sometimes this is because they feel inadequate, and think they deserve to be in pain.
but it was in fact only a beachhead.
odd is not very good when it comes to school but he always makes you laugh.
she is a day student at kadic.
she has a crush on ulrich.
it tells the story of two young witches who are in competition.
they are trying to become the new queen of their world.
vanilla and chocola are two young witches who are sent in the humans world in order to decide who will become the new queen of their world.
it is where the dead people are.
its ruler is the goddess hel.
he lets the dead souls enter.
when the rooster in the realm of the gods will wake them for ragnarök, this rooster will wake the souls of the dead.
a wolf also eats from these.
it is free and open source.
this means that the particles move left and right which in turn makes the other particles start to oscillate.
it is an old language that has been spoken for many centuries.
it is also a language of china that is spoken by some people above the region of tibet.
it is spoken in other places as well as tibet.
it is a fairly popular language to the buddhists everywhere in the world including the united states.
they sleep during the day and are awake at night; this is called nocturnal.
the female is pregnant for 11 months, which is a long time for such a small mammal.
the word can also mean "symbolism".
it is a sign or a likeness that stands for a real object or person.
it was always hoped that a painting would last for a long time, so everything had to be very carefully prepared.
it was not important for the artist to think of something new and different.
it was much more important that he could copy another icon very accurately.
he tried three times and failed.
the first time he met the people living in the hotel, they wasn't very happy to see him.
she loves to clean and cook.
it is followed by the dreamcast.
the following is a list of dinosaurs.
some of them such as archaeopteryx are considered by some to be birds rather than dinosaurs.
some of them took as long as 13 years.
they did not like that names like "atheist" and "non-believer" sounded bad to some people and they wanted a word that sounded better to these people.
dish can mean a plate or pan for food or a kind of food prepared for a meal.
very large hinges have been used at the bottom of buildings, to let a building sit on loose soil or mud without breaking.
visible light is the light that can be seen by the human eye.
it is a small part of the spectrum of light and radiation given off by stars like the sun.
the producer is of the person in charge of providing the money and hire people to do the job.
it is also the job of the producer to deal with getting whatever is being made out to the public.
many italians drink it with every meal and in-between, and offer it to guests as soon as they arrive.
the people of each region are also proud of the wine they make from their own grapes.
the body does not have a lot of platelets, so they can all be used up quickly.
the word is used to describe something that feels truthful.
as you can see, the number of the microprocessors is responsible for the name of the processor.
the main reason is that they are faster than single-core processors and they can be still improved.
fourteen people where hurt in the riots.
six of the people hurt were police.
the "sweet orange", which is the kind that are most often eaten today, grew first in asia but now grows in many parts of the world.
orange trees have dark green shiny leaves and small white flowers with five petals.
oranges are an important food source in many parts of the world for several reasons.
these oranges often have red marks on the skin, and some parts of the inside look as if they have blood in them.
but they could not grow from seed.
they could only grow from cuttings.
it had an 8 m long neck and 14 m long tail.
it is also believed to have knocked the trees down.
a complete tail has never been found.
other meanings are always there too, and the book or poem works because all of those meanings work together.
other important people who talked about it include paul de man.
it is also one of the three most important blood sugars, the other two being glucose and galactose.
it can be used for cooking.
a great power is a nation or state that is able to influece other states in a large part of the world.
a bite is a wound received from the teeth of an animal.
animals may bite things in self-defence.
animals also bite things to cut them into smaller pieces before they eat them.
if possible, the animal is caught and the head is looked at for signs of rabies.
many of the world's snakes are not considered dangerous to humans, but even a bite from a "safe" snake may injure the victim if the wound is not treated properly, and large snakes such as constrictors are capable of causing a lot of damage with their bites.
most of the countries in the region share
this is a list of pterosaurs'".
permanent used as an adjective usually means that something is very hard to get rid of or destroy.
it is usually used to make cloth.
it is often used in the creation of light clothing and table coverings.
the flax plant is one of the plants humans have grown and used.
linen cloth was already made at least 6,000 years ago in egypt and mesopotamia.
it was made from a kind of reed called the paper reed.
it is very sweet because it has a lot of sugar in it.
this means the animal trying to get the nectar have to touch the parts of the plant that are used for reproduction.
these categories have smaller groups in them that are based on different things the dogs are good at doing.
the first line was opened in 1979.
the works were completed in stages.
children below the age of 3 travel free.
this is being talked about now and the whole longer line should be finished and running by 2012.
most humans have 12 pairs of rib bones with one from each pair on each side of the chest.
the person asking questions is called the "interviewer" and the person answering questions is called the "interviewee".
employers interview people trying to get a job to find out if they are a good person for the job.
his father had also been the king of mercia.
it is set in the future, but also has many things about it which would be expected in a story of the american old west.
the show looks at the changing lives of people who fought on the losing side of a civil war.
this government was called the "alliance".
there are more people with better technology, but they still have the same problems politically, morally and ethically.
he wanted to follow people who had fought on the losing side of a war.
he wanted to look at their lives after the war on the edges of civilization.
it was meant to be the kind of drama with a lot of people trying to figure out their lives in a pioneer environment.
whedon wanted to have a show that was about when life was physical and things did not come easy to people.
the fact that it was also something small with a powerful name made him like it more.
from there, he created the ship in the image of a firefly.
they thought that it did not have enough action.
they also did not like the captain.
fox told whedon on a friday afternoon that he had to make a new script by monday morning or they would not do it.
it was built as a complete set.
it had ceilings and working lights built in as part of the set that the cameras could use.
there were other good things about this set design.
one was that it let the people watching feel that they were really in a ship.
their small budget was a reason to use the ship for much of telling the story.
after telling him the idea for the show and showing him the pilot, fillion wanted the role.
fillion was called back several times to read for the part before he was cast.
it was down to him and one other person.
he got a call telling him he had the part anyway.
two weeks later whedon called her to tell her she had the part.
much of the crew's work is made up of cargo runs or smuggling.
while doing this, they must stay hidden from people looking for them.
it is used to send e-mails.
the family itself is also sometimes known as the liudolfings, after its earliest known member "liudolf" and one of its most common names.
the normal life of sandy bay is changed by the two geniuses.
he was to be punished with russ.
he tried to use his mouth to change the water.
this was an important step to change the party into ‘new labour’.
this was called papyrus, and served much the same purpose that paper does today.
its roots were also used as fuels.
students spent half of their time in class, and half in the shop.
josiah was a child king of judah.
josiah was thought of as a good king.
he following in the steps of his ancestor king david.
he was killed by king necho of egypt while josiah was helping the king of assyria fight off the attacks of the egyptian.
he is thought to be an evil king.
he only ruled for 3 months in jerusalem before the egyptian king took him to egypt and put another of josiah's sons on the throne as the new king of judah.
there is a minumum of one whole day that the sun does not set and one whole day that the sun does not rise.
at least three children have been born in antarctica.
they would be citizens of antarctica if there were a nation on the continent.
because she was the daughter of king charles vi of france she was not allowed to have a large part in raising her son.
his job was to keep the peace and deal with parliament.
he was in charge of running the war that was happening.
he did not actually take control of government until he was of age in 1437 - the year his mother died.
he did not have the wisdom needed to rule effectively.
the english people would not be happy to know the lands were given away.
she was ready to take decisions and lead while he was happy to be led by her.
the name of the city does not come from a saint.
it is not like opera where there is usually music all the way through.
it is called “incidental” because the music is not as important as the play.
tragedies were about important people who were busy ruling their country and having wars.
in all these examples the music is now usually heard at concerts, not as part of the original play.
it is very hot and is used as a spice.
richard had been asked by his brother the king to look after the two boys.
he was worried that the new young king would not be able to rule the country properly.
he was also worried that the woodville family would soon be telling the king what to do and ruling the country for themselves.
at the time, many people believed that king richard had ordered them to be killed, but no one is really sure what happened to them.
however, there were enough people who hated him to make sure that his enemies were able to raise a big army against him and defeat him in battle.
they made it to the world series but were beaten by philadelphia in five games.
they are used to show every letter in a font, or to test a keyboard or typewriter.
binary is a way to show whole numbers using only 1 and 0.
the value of the bit (binary 1 or 0) on the right side of the number is 1.
every other bit has a value two times the value of the bit to its right.
the bit on the right is 1 and has a value of 1.
the bit on the left is 1 and has a value of 4 (2 times 2).
it belongs to the same family as the currant.
it can be cooked to make it soft.
or it can be left out on purpose to rot a little which makes it soft.
it has seeds that are covered in red jelly
sometimes parents use it when they want to control what their children are allowed to watch.
they will stack the balls on top of each other to make a snowman, and stick some things in it to make it look more like a person.
at first they had only one wire, then in urban areas many.
if a person upstages another person it means that he or she makes an audience pay attention to him or her instead of to the other person.
the word comes from the theatre but it can also be used for situations outside the theatre.
the man is talking or singing to the woman.
because she is facing the man she has her back to the audience.
this means that the man, who is still talking or singing to her, has to turn his back to the audience in order to face the woman.
sometimes we might talk about upstaging even if it is not in the theatre.
imagine a speaker who is talking to an audience.
they are not listening to the speaker any more.
high school musical
together, they try out for the lead parts in their high school musical.
it is much sweeter but is in the same family as it.
the ripe mangoes are very sweet in taste but bitterly sour before they ripen.
it is an important food crop in italy, spain and especially in greece among other countries around the mediterranean.
the first season of the show had 12 episodes.
the people who make the show are planning to make at least two more seasons and maybe a full length movie.
the first season ends with a cliffhanger that leads into the second season.
it does this by turning two or more wings very quick.
a shelter is a place where someone or something is put in or goes to be kept safe or hidden.
it can also be any place where people live that "shelters" (protects) them from any danger such as the weather.
there are different kinds of shelters and they are for used for different reasons.
in these places, women are there to hide or are running away from abusive or dangerous situations.
in these shelters, they are given food and a place to stay for an amount of time (usually 1-3 months at a time).
they are put into a support group and given a temporary counselor.
it is much smaller and it only has 8 calories.
they are in the family rosaceae.
they live in or near water.
it starts out as a white flower like an almond.
they usually grow three to six meters tall but can get as tall as 13 meters.
they are in the family of rosaceae.
they taste like a mixture of a rose and a pineapple.
it is said to be the first garden created only for roses.
the distance between two notes which are separated by one other note in pitch.
this is easy to see with a picture of a keyboard.
the distance between two white notes that are side by side may be a whole tone (if there is a black note in between them) or a semitone (if there is no black note between).
to go from a c to a d is a tone.
it is an old victorian town which was built around its famous water.
it is passed through a fluid in order to provide either lift or downforce, depending on its application.
it breaks when you give it a sharp blow.
the fruit are soft and juicy.
a butcher is person whose job is to prepare and sell meat.
hot-linking is when someone uses a link to an image that is saved on another website instead of saving a copy of the image on the website that the picture will be shown on.
critics also point to the problem that radioactive waste has to be stored for a very long time.
columns can be either a single piece or several pieces put together.
the bow is the forward part of the hull of a ship or boat, the point that is most forward when the vessel is underway.
the fruit is also called elderberries.
a fairly fast growing species, it can grow as high as 30 metres, and can live more than 100 years.
the wood is strong and water resistant.
another variety comes in white and some people say that it can be used as a medicine.
it has a small smooth seed.
they are yellow when they are ripe and green when not ripe.
all of these plants are shrubs.
they are in the family ericaceae.
ilama is a kind of fruit, and also the name of the tree that it grows on.
the queen of canada does not spend much time in canada because she is the same person as the queen of great britain.
it was much bigger than any ship of that time.
nothing has been found that could seem to show that the ark rested on mount ararat.
for this reason, many theologians have come to see the story of the flood as a myth, that should not be understood literally.
there are also some problems with the way the story is understood, that started during renaissance.
how can there have been two of them?
they began to think about it from a practical point of view.
the obvious answer was that man had spread over the continents after the destruction of the tower of babel.
the different groups took animals with them.
many people came looking for gold.
during the second world war there were many american soldiers staying in australia.
here are some examples of things which sound the same.
some of these words have changed in meaning.
sometimes we do not know where a word came from.
an angel or a star is often placed at the top of the tree.
he tried to make a cult of personality, which means that he put many pictures and statues of himself around his country to make himself seem important.
the changes in these regions between summer and winter are not extreme, not burning hot or freezing cold.
one day it may be sunny, the next it may be raining, and after that it may be cloudy.
both languages have many things in common.
also, those two words can be used all over the world, in all languages, and the name does not change based on country or time.
the names may come from any source whatsoever.
the names are always treated grammatically as if they were a latin sentence.
these things can be real or imaginary.
some systems are nothing more than a different way of looking at a problem, or thinking about a job being done.
she used to be a model for catalogs.
they are in the rose family rosaceae.
when he was a young man he played in concerts all over germany.
henselt was known for his beautiful playing of the music of chopin.
they grow up to be about 1 inch.
many stars are part of a system of two or more stars.
binary stars are not the same as double stars, which look close together but are not connected by gravity, and may actually be far apart in space.
other binary stars are so close together that instruments must be used to tell them apart.
one way to tell binary stars and double stars apart is to watch them for a long period of time.
some stars appear to be in orbit around empty space, and appear not to have a companion.
they are very close together and move around each other very quickly, over a period of a few weeks or even a few days.
however, they can be seen to be two separate stars by using a spectroscope, which is able to record the doppler change in the color of the light sent out by stars moving quickly toward or away from the earth.
in this case, the amount of light we see from the double dims slightly during the time one star is in front of the other.
some binaries are so close to one another that one or both stars is able to pull material from the other.
such separated stars go on to live lives as ordinary single stars.
such an event may also result in runaway stars, as the larger star no longer has a heavy companion which keeps it in orbit.
it is equal to fourteen pounds.
trees grow in some of the tundra.
there are a number of ways of explaining the production of lift, all of which are equivalent.
this area includes all the areas of the earth where the sun reaches a point directly overhead at least once a year.
the lower parts do not have permafrost.
walking is how people travel on foot.
if a person goes out walking, it is said that he or she 'went for a walk'.
walking for a long time is healthy exercise.
so there is much less humidity added during the year than would be necessary for the demand for evaporation and transpiration.
pions are made in the crash
it can be done by anybody, but people are often told not to try unless they have received proper first aid training.
it is continued until the heart can be restarted or the cause is diagnosed.
he was born at a time when russia had a lot of power in finland and the finnish people were trying hard to keep their own culture and their independence.
he learned to play the violin and wanted to be a soloist.
he spent a lot of his money, much of it on drink which was to be a big problem for him for many years.
the finnish were trying more and more at this time to be free of rule by russia.
in 1897 he was given a state pension which helped him financially although for many years he was still very often short of money because he had expensive tastes.
they had a house built in järvenpää.
he never wrote any more music.
he continued to live in retirement in his house in the finnish country for another 30 years.
besides his important works he also wrote many short works in order to earn enough money to live.
his music has also been an influence on recent composers.
he was born into a family of very poor peasants but through a lot of hard work and effort was able to enter the university of chile - something very unusual in a poor country like chile.
each show has their own cast of wrestlers.
these events have more important matches.
it was small and armored with a tail that was a foot long.
it could have walked on all four legs but ran on its two hind legs.
he wrote it in 1899 and made some changes to it the next year.
this was because it was being ruled by russia.
the reason for this low pressure is that water gets out of the leaves into the atmosphere.
famine is a situation where there is not enough food for people to eat.
without food, the human body grows weaker and weaker until the person becomes very sick or dies.
it has to do with chance.
behind 2 doors there are goats.
and behind the last door there is a car.
some countries have a different emergency number for each of the different emergency services, but they are often different only by the last digit.
satellite cities are smaller cities that are next to a large city that is the center of a metropolitan area.
often irregular structures good enough to keep the rain away or to protect from the summer sun.
he was one of the most important composers of his day and he wrote lots of different kinds of music.
a lot of his music is based on hymns of the protestant church.
he was born at a time when there was a lot of argument about religion in germany.
his father was a strict lutheran and lost his job more than once because of his beliefs.
we know very little about the life of praetorius.
he soon earned a good salary.
when he died he left a lot of money to the poor.
much of it has been lost.
the tune would be in the top part so that the congregation could join in.
part one talks about religious music.
it is very interesting for us today because it tells us a lot about the way that martin luther wanted to change music in the church services.
he was going to write a part four in which he wanted to discuss the technique of musical composition, but he died before he could write it.
he stole fire from zeus and gave it to the humans.
every day an eagle would come and eat his liver.
he is immortal, so he never dies, but it is still great pain that he gets for making the gods angry.
in music the pitch of a note means how high or low a note is.
the pitch of a note can be measured in a unit called hertz.
this will be middle c on the piano.
not all musical instruments give notes of a particular pitch.
this means that they always know what note is being played, even without comparing it to another note.
in christian churches the word “congregation” is often used to mean all the people in the main part of the church, but not the choir or the priests.
someone who is trying to do something but not succeeding may be using the wrong technique.
the tree is from warm parts of the americas.
the inside of the fruit is white and contains a sweet but sharp-tasting juice.
although the fruit contains sugars and a lot of vitamins, it may not be good to eat a lot of it.
they usually live near or in water.
high and low
they can also mean several other things.
generally, high means more of something and low means less of something.
it is usually the distance from the ground to something.
it can also be the distance from the top of something to the bottom of it.
when measuring the height of something (the distance from the top of it to the bottom of it), this measurement is how tall something is.
above and below are terms used about where things are compared to each other.
something that is below something else is lower than it.
the meat is below the cheese.
it is lower than the cheese.
how high or low a note is depends on the frequency of the vibrations.
it can be used to stay alive, however you usually lose a chance to hit when healing.
but they are common objects of study because it is easy to keep them in a laboratory.
they have been around since 1991.
the player has the ability to look up and down, which they could not do in doom.
the group is led by a female and a male.
sometimes if a minor member is in trouble with the leader it will groom the leader to try and calm them down.
when the family is eating or playing together, one meerkat takes time out and looks for animals that might want to eat meerkats.
sometimes a female who never gave birth will produce milk for the pups.
they have no extra body fat, so they must look for food every day and eat food every day.
when the meerkat group is eating, a guard will stand up and look for any animals that might eat its family.
if the guard sees an animal, it gives a loud chirp and the family will run to a hole to be safe.
jackals and other big animals that eat meat will sometimes eat meerkats.
when pups are looking for food, they will cry loudly and an adult will come and feed them.
at first the adult gives the pup a dead animal, then when the pup is older, the adult will bring an alive animal but will hurt it so the pup can kill it easier.
then the adults start bringing alive animals that are healthy, and when the pup gets the hang of eating these, the adults stop bringing food.
they weigh about one and a half pounds and the meerkat is ten to fourteen inches long.
the meerkat uses its tail to balance because it stands up on its back legs to look for animals that would eat it.
the front side is black and has no fur because it needs to get warm in the morning to be ready for the day.
meerkats can give birth at any time of the year but like to give birth in spring and summer because there is more food.
when the babies are born they are pink and have no hair.
their eyes and ears are closed.
when they are three weeks old, the mother allows them to get out of the burrow.
by this time their eyes and ears have opened and they have light brown fur.
the babies cannot be left alone so one of the other meerkats besides the mother stays behind to watch them.
then she gives birth in a burrow.
she feeds the babies milk until they start looking for food with the rest of the group, which is when they turn one month old.
the leader of the group is a girl and her mate is the male leader.
if a female goes, then the leader kicks her out and sometimes the leader kills her grandchildren.
sometimes these small groups die out.
there are many games in this series.
you can be 3 different characters.
it may be a relative to ornithomimus.
there is also more of a story in "hexen".
it sold more than 1 million copies in the first two weeks after its release.
each character has a certain amount of experienece that they needs to gain before they can become the next level.
the queen then ordered that the body be quickly hidden in a hut nearby.
at dawn the queen learned of the miracle and was troubled and again ordered the disposal of the body, this time by burying it in a marshy place near wareham.
but a year after the murder a column of fire was seen over the place where the body was hidden, lighting up the whole area.
immediately a clear spring of healing water sprang up in that place.
accompanied by what was now a huge crowd of mourners, the body was taken to the church of the most holy mother of god in wareham and buried at the east end of the church.
when the relics were taken up from the grave, they were found to be whole and not destroyed.
as the tomb was opened a wonderful fragrance issued from it - such that all present "thought that they were standing in paradise".
angel had his soul returned to him as punishment for killing a gypsy girl.
this made him tormented by all the bad things he had done.
he also had to fight his own violent nature.
the fifth season saw angel taking over as the person in charge of the law firm wolfram and hart.
this was done to try to fight evil from the inside.
he felt a very large amount of guilt for what he had done over all those years.
he hoped that he might make up for his past by doing good deeds.
it might be separate or the same thing as ultrasaurus.
there are different kinds of canon.
if one voice starts on a c and the next voice starts the same tune on an f above this is a “canon at the fourth” (because the interval (distance) from c to f is called a “perfect fourth”).
if this does not happen (i.e.
many of his organ works have canons.
this is hard to compose well so that it sounds good because when the first voice has just changed key the other one is still catching up in the other key.
tried for murder, he was found guilty and hanged a week later.
this system, in which every kind of animal and plant is given a name consisting of two latin words, was soon used by countries all over the world.
he was very famous in his time, and also a very good linguist.
he is the father of taxonomy.
he was going to be a priest, but did not do so well in school for that.
his reputation had spread over the world, and he talked with many different people.
he was buried in the cathedral.
most pieces of music will modulate, especially if they are long pieces.
they do this because the ions have a charge which is opposite to the end they go to.
this is strange as water is a liquid.
the music is full of tension because it leaves us wondering which key the music is in.
he was from one of the richest and most powerful families in the united states, the rockefellers.
in antiquity it was often simply a wooden board on which the dead was placed covered with a shroud.
any box used to bury the dead in is a coffin.
it was used by the united states military so their enemies had no place to hide.
the story is not finished yet.
the people that knew that naruto was the demon could not tell anyone, but it did not stop them from being mean with naruto.
he has said that it was after this meeting that he wanted to become a diplomat.
earlier in the year, he had spoken to the council on foreign relations in new york.
it may mean someone born in the united states with italian parents or grandparents or someone born in italy who moved to the united states.
italian americans have been an important part in building the united states.
one of these parts is called the house of representatives and the other one is called the senate.
a representative in one of those state houses is a state representative.
some people think of him as the greatest quarterback of all time.
to get into a hall of fame in any area one must be the best in that area, or one of the best.
we call this "chronological"; this is what would happen in real life.
in sicily, the art of "paranza", moving the stick by hand in order to attack or in order to defend oneself, was being taught to sons by their fathers for centuries.
many people who took care of sheep were masters of it.
they often were asked to fight in order to decide problems of honor.
it is used as a base for a number of actions.
it is held in one or both hands.
he fought many battles during his time as king.
most of them were to expand his territory and to stop other groups of people becoming more powerful.
he was killed in battle in 924.
edmund was killed fighting a thief who would not leave a royal party.
an example of this is the duck.
some kinds of insects have mouths that are long and narrow and are called a beak.
coral is usually found in warm water like that found around indonesia, but some type of coral can be found as far north as the very cold waters around norway.
from here he took part in several military campaigns against william, and later on also took part in the crusades.
it is thought he was the last living male member of the anglo-saxon royalty, but may have fathered a son whose descendants are still around to this day though undiscovered.
state slogans are not official and change more often than state mottos.
here is a list of u.s.
the person then makes some theories.
here is a list of u.s.
there is also a list of u.s.
on the flat surface there are only one such path between any two points.
the good, the bad and the ugly
he ordered the arrest as part of the investigation of his part in the assassination.
chun himself did not die because he got there two minutes late.
he went on to teach for several years in mungyeong, where the school has been preserved as a museum.
after this attack he finished the speech he had been giving.
his wife died later that day.
he was found alive at his house in seoul five days after the kidnapping.
he became so like an american that he began writing his name in the western manner, with the personal name before the family name.
in 1910, he went back to korea, which had by this time been taken over by japan.
this was before the other independence leaders, since he was the only one well known to the allies.
this was actually a hidden plan to remove all possible opposition to him.
his decision to cut the bridges on the han river stopped thousands of people from escaping from the communists.
rhee became unpopular with the us and the un for refusing to agree to a number of peace plans that would have left korea divided.
he wanted to become the leader of a united korea with un assistance.
he tried to stop any peace plan that would not remove the northern government completely.
he also argued for stronger military action to be used against china.
this was to rescue him from the angry crowds.
they are trained at a young age at a summer camp.
everyone dove and was lying on the ground.
he became famous for the many stories told about his dealing with the devil.
by hard work, his father was somehow able to send his sons to college.
an interval in music means the distance between two notes (whether these notes are played together or separately).
whether the black note between d and e is written as d sharp or e flat (which are two different names for the same note).
c d e f g a b c and down again.
(this is always so long as the letter name has not changed).
it is important to realize that, in order to work out what an interval is, the lower note should be treated as the first note of the scale.
it is the same as aeolian, but the d is treated as the final note (we would say the “keynote”).
sharp means that something can cut easily.
something that has a very narrow edge may be sharp.
a mountain may have a sharp peak.
a stone may be sharp and used for cutting.
if a picture is sharp it is well in focus.
southwest asia or western asia is the part of asia that includes the middle east.
the master of the house is mr.
the area of suwałki has had people living on it since the early middle ages.
the new owners of the area started fast use and building of the forests and brought enough settlers to build new villages in the area.
the town was cut into into 300 lots for future houses and its people were all given civil rights and did not have taxes for seven years.
the town was also given 18.03 square kilometres of forest that was to be made into land to grow crops on.
the next year local authorities were moved to the town, as well as a group of soldiers.
in 1820 a new church was built and the following year the first synagogue opened.
the number of people living in the city kept growing quickly.
soon the city became the fourth biggest town in the kingdom of poland.
after the great war broke out, there were fights for the area.
most of the money in the city was made from trade during this time.
the number of people rose quickly and by the end of the 1970s there were over 36,000 people in the city.
also, the clean city started to bring many tourists from all around the world to the city.
they are found in warm areas of europe, asia and north america.
what seaborgium looks like is not known because not enough has been made to see it with human eyesight.
they can be eaten and have a lot of vitamin c. it is usually red/orange but may be dark purple to black in some species.
it is one of the largest groups of hasidic jews in the world.
the two had two sons and a daughter.
the other party that they share this status with are the övp.
it has always been a town based on commerce.
displays are common throughout the world and are a main point of many different cultural and religious celebrations.
the club was starting in 1889.
it is not connected in any way to the "yu-gi-oh!
others moved away to towns where they were not known.
its partner this time was the green party.
they either have worked a long time during their life, or they are physically unable to do so.
the books are about how the city of rome came to be.
the rebbe is a man who is a rabbi and is chosen by the hasidim to be their leader.
many people who saw her website asked her how she made it.
lissa was upset because her parents would not pay so much money for her website.
it tells the story of aeneas.
it starts with aeneas carrying his father anchises out of the burning troja.
the story is written in hexameters.
in 2000 the number of people in the city was 40,366.
they usually have a door and one or more shelves.
there were waves up to 25 meters.
the total number of deaths from the earthquake and tsunami was believed to be 6,000.
most people hire a photographer for their wedding or other special events.
these plants have sharp thorns like roses.
this is the usual meaning of the word “part” when talking about musical compositions.
when a group of instruments are all playing the same notes together - like the first violins in an orchestra, they are all playing the same part.
a group of singers who are all singing the tune together are singing in "unison".
sometimes music for the piano or organ may be written in a strict number of parts, e.g.
in most other european languages the word for "part" in this musical sense is the same as the normal word for "voice" e.g.
in general, the more parts there are in a musical composition the harder it is to compose because they all have to fit together to sound nice.
a choir of at least 40 people is needed to sing it, and even then each person will be singing something different to all the others.
it is the most common way for people to watch movies at home.
in music it is used to mean that all instruments or voices are sounding at the same pitch.
they are no longer singing in unison.
he became famous in the early 2000s playing the part of "dr.
widescreen is often used as it let more of an image to be seen on the screen.
it is so big that two or three earth's could fit inside it.
people who have it often have mood-swings.
there are a few things that a lot of people start to believe when they have manic episodes.
sometimes taking medicine or getting therapy can make it easier to control.
in the 2000s there were a lot of changes of job policy and ways of helping people in need.
it is the only party in the federal parliament, which believes in the need for government rules protecting jobs and people instead of letting do everything thay want.
they want to have more people employed in by government bodies instead of having private companies doing jobs for the government.
they are still talking about allowing german soldiers to be in the peace keeping missions of the united nations.
this is because the first laptop did not look the same as we know it today.
when we look at the platform of the latest notebooks we can hardly see a place that could be improved.
our near future looks very bright now.
it can be used to make notes and to draw things.
this is a story started by a girl shooting a boy who has dog ears and white hair.
she meets kaede, an older one because 50 years passed in this world after what happened to kikyo.
this is the beginning of their adventure and they also have to find one of the evil, who is naraku.
the souls can make a person very powerful.
when midoriko was about to die fighting a demon, she joined her 4 soul inside her heart, with the soul of the demon to make it good and pure.
this battle is depends to the person who has the jewel.
many creatures want the jewel because it can make them powerful like midoriko.
they can do anything they want with it.
if someone wants to become a full demon then they will become that, just like naraku wants to.
he took the jewel to kikyo.
some people tried to make shikon no tama themselves so that they can have its power without trying to find all the pieces.
when inuyasha and his friends come to save izumo who plans to get them because of his friends having the souls that he needed to make a real shikon no tama.
-inuyasha and kagome are separated for three years and then brought together forever
his arm had to be removed.
he was beaten badly in prison.
in its first years the main part of the party followed a national-liberal way.
but in every state it had its own way.
the next important man was thomas dehler.
it became more and more a single issue party with its only interest in a low tax tarif - espially for high incomes.
in 1998 it lost its power and became part of the opposition.
so they got the idea to found their own party.
sometimes he was well known for the good that he did.
for business there is a difference between the usa, where it most often means the amount of money that a company earns after paying for all its costs, and the world outside the u.s., where the term is usually profit or earnings.
the field of study of this subject is to see if a certain problem can be solved by a computer.
it looks to see if a certain problem can be solved by a computer.
the rod was the length of this stick.
the rod is still in use as a unit of measure in certain specialised fields.
a chain is a unit of length.
people usually used it for measuring land.
there are a number of different chains from 50 to 100 feet long.
when people talk about the chain as a unit they normally mean the unit of the imperial or u.s.
in the past people used to use wire chains for measuring land.
the unit was once important in everyday life in united kingdom and its colonies and in the united states.
people used it when they made maps and planned out cities and towns.
it is based on the vara.
this made him an enemy of war.
that way he lost much of his audience.
he has written many books and poems.
it can also be used as an ingredient in a sweet bread.
many consider the study of civil service to be a part of the field of public administration.
one speaks of wages if the employee is paid by the hour and of salary if he is paid a set rate per pay period.
wages are paid for all hours worked, including overtime, but a salary is typically not paid more for more hours worked than the minimum.
in kingdom hearts ii, you play as a 15 year old boy named sora.
occasionally, there will be enemies you have to defeat that are based on the world you are in, such as the cursed pirates in pirates of the caribbean.
it does not weigh much, and it is easy to make into things.
it was the distance a person could walk in about one hour.
it was used for a while together with the metric system but it is not used now.
a quart is a unit of measurement for volume.
in jurisprudence, a natural person is a real human being in contrast to an artificial person, that means an organization that the law treats for some purposes as if it were a person distinct from its members or owner.
that is the case for most of the human rights.
the ideas of the western legal tradition have become so pervasive throughout the world that it is tempting to see them as universal.
officer of arms
they wait three days because this is how long it used to take to get from london to edinburgh by horse.
personal property means property that consists of object that can be moved from one place to another.
in the common law systems personal property may also be called chattels.
under the common law, the law is not just made by legislation.
the common law is used in the united kingdom and most countries that used to be colonies of the british empire, including the united states.
a "precedent" is something that another court has done in the past.
by looking at decisions by earlier court, a common-law court tries to make decisions that will not surprise people and that fit in with the rest of the law.
in common law countries, when people like lawyers and judges want to know what the law is, they look at what courts have written.
when a court decides a case, it makes a decision and then usually writes an "opinion" about what the law is.
a court's opinion explains how the court reached its decision, and it is a guide for later courts that need to decide similar cases.
for example, a lawyer or judge might say that a case can be decided using "only common law."
today, in most places, there are not two separate systems, and courts sometimes say that they work with both common law and equity.
it is better is they also complete a familiarization summer course, but a cadet does not have to take this course to become a sergeant.
if we did not have this system, then it is likely that the law would not be fairly enforced.
most of them can be found near the nostrils.
it may even destroy the cells.
the building was finished in 1973.
the legs and wings of the beetle come out of the thorax.
the front wings cover the back of the beetle.
the front wings also hide the back wings when the beetle is not flying.
the back wings are used for flying.
beetles must first lift the front wings out of the way in order to fly.
most other insects do not have hard front wings and soft back wings.
only a few beetles have no wings at all and can never fly.
each leg is made out of several parts.
the parts on the end of each leg are often the smallest.
these kinds of legs are found on water beetles and are good for swimming.
flat legs with horns are called fossorial legs because they help with digging.
sometimes the two eyes are each divided in half so that it looks like there are four eyes.
the mouth of a beetle is very different from the mouth of a person.
beetles also have four “fingers” around their mouth that push food into the mouth of the beetle.
it flows in their bodies and is usually a green colour.
this way of growing up is called complete metamorphosis.
these beetles can only eat one kind of plant or one kind of other insect.
some leaf beetles are green so that they can not be seen when they are on green leaves.
he is known for his antisemitism.
musical notes can be placed either on a line (i.e.
with a line going through the middle of the note head) or in a space.
the first three notes are on the second line (counting from the bottom).
after the three fs comes a d in the outside bottom space.
if two or more staves are being played at the same time the staves are joined on the left by a bracket which is called a brace.
the notes can be written just on one line.
it is a kind of beetle.
they belong to the order "opiliones".
most of the time this is small insects, and some plants and fungi.
the souls can make a person very powerful.
when midoriko was about to die fighting a demon, she joined her 4 soul inside her heart, with the soul of the demon to make it good and pure.
this battle is depends to the person who has the jewel.
many creatures want the jewel because it can make them powerful like midoriko.
they can do anything they want with it.
if someone wants to become a full demon then they will become that, just like naraku wants to.
he took the jewel to kikyo.
some people tried to make shikon no tama themselves so that they can have its power without trying to find all the pieces.
when inuyasha and his friends come to save izumo who plans to get them because of his friends having the souls that he needed to make a real shikon no tama.
its legs are about 5 or 6 times the length of its body.
most of these names are only used by people in small areas.
this may help them to escape from birds who try to eat them.
the wings are often held out from the body when the crane fly is not moving.
they also do not eat mosquitoes.
on the council, he had the job of planning improving the city, the same kind of work his father had done.
he planned new houses for poor people.
other people still said he was not doing enough to build the military.
many other changes were planned, but the start of the war stopped these changes from happening.
they believed that people like adolf hitler were in power because their people felt that their situation was.
some people think that his actions were wrong because he did not stop hitler.
a is not 0
the left side is now a perfect square; it is the square of
find the square root of both sides.
these beetles are special in that most of them have the ability to produce light.
there are about 2000 different species.
they use flashes of light to attract mates.
they feed on millipedes and other animals they find in the soil and litter.
it is thought to be unfinished because it did not have a note to tell the reader it was ended.
this is thought his best work for this anime.
it was shown all over the world.
a demon or daemon is a bad or powerful being in many world religions.
ancient egyptians thought of demons as "monsters" that ate souls of people when they went to the afterlife.
so if it is far away from someone, that person would feel hurt.
the demons had to do whatever the king said.
the word 'demon' has different meanings all over the world, but often there is the idea that they are spirits that lived in a place, or went with a person.
christians believe that demons were bad angels that went to bad ways instead of good ways.
angels were like humans, god asked them if they wanted to stay with him, or to go away from him.
those angels who became demons because they wanted to go away, fought against god, who won the battle with michael.
god sent the bad demons into a prison called hell and they couldn't see god now for the punishment.
those demons are called the fallen angels.
what happens to the fallen angels.
some say that the demons go back to heaven after asking forgiveness of their bad doings.
but others say they stay in that prison forever.
the demons go into the prison also because of marrying a human woman, when they are not supposed to.
most of these were ordinary citizens or civilians working in the small shops set up near the bank.
a ledger line is a short line used to write notes which would otherwise be too high or too low for the staff.
it is usually easier to change the clef.
a clef is a sign at the beginning of a staff of music which makes it possible for the player to work out what the notes are.
middle c is on the fourth line up.
it is an f clef because the two dots are on either side of the fourth line up which is an f below middle c.
the first idea that it could be useful came from the economist james tobin.
since one country acting alone would find it very difficult to introduce this tax, many argue it would be best done by an international institution.
the reason is that he wants to profit from the changes of market prices.
one tries to buy the goods when they are cheap and to sell them when they are expensive.
there is a good chance to do that as long as the market price of a good changes often in different directions.
an arrest is a procedure by which a person who is thought to have broken the law is taken away into jail so that they can be placed on trial.
he also suggested that the money gained from the tax could be used to fund projects for the benefit of third world countries, or to support the united nations.
the bretton woods system was the first system used to control the value of money between different countries.
he is married to dorothy, a priest in the church of england.
he has also worked on c--.
for example, one could use a value between 0 and 1 to say how much it is true.
zero would mean that it is completely false and one would mean that is completely true.
