amminadab was their leader.
then david asked the priests, zadok and abiathar, to come to him.
david also asked these levites to come to him: uriel, asaiah, joel, shemaiah, eliel, and amminadab.
david said to them, “you are the leaders from the tribe of levi.
you and the other levites must make yourselves holy.
then bring the holy box of the lord, the god of israel, to the place i have made for it.
the first time we tried to bring it, we failed to ask the lord about the right way to move it.
and he punished us because you levites did not carry it.” 
then the priests and levites made themselves holy so that they could carry the holy box of the lord, the god of israel.
the levites used the special poles to carry god’s holy box on their shoulders, the way moses commanded.
they carried the holy box just as the lord had said.
david told the levite leaders to get their brothers, the singers.
the singers were to take their lyres, harps, and cymbals and sing happy songs.
then the levites got heman and his brothers, asaph and ethan.
heman was joel’s son.
asaph was berekiah’s son.
ethan was kushaiah’s son.
these men were from the merari tribe.
there was also a second group of levites.
they were zechariah, jaaziel, shemiramoth, jehiel, unni, eliab, benaiah, maaseiah, mattithiah, eliphelehu, mikneiah, obed edom, and jeiel.
these men were the levite guards.
the singers heman, asaph, and ethan played bronze cymbals.
zechariah, jaaziel, shemiramoth, jehiel, unni, eliab, maaseiah, and benaiah played the alamoth harps.
mattithiah, eliphelehu, mikneiah, obed edom, jeiel, and azaziah played the sheminith harps.
this was their job forever.
the levite leader kenaniah was in charge of the singing.
kenaniah had this job because he was very skilled at singing.
berekiah and elkanah were two of the guards for the holy box.
the priests shebaniah, joshaphat, nethanel, amasai, zechariah, benaiah, and eliezer had the job of blowing trumpets as they walked in front of god’s holy box.
obed edom and jehiah were the other guards for the holy box.
david, the elders of israel, and the generals went to get the box of the lord’s agreement.
they brought it out from obed edom’s house.
everyone was very happy!
god had helped the levites who carried the box of the lord’s agreement.
so they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams to him.
all the levites who carried the holy box wore robes made from fine linen.
kenaniah, the man in charge of the singing, and all the singers had robes made from fine linen.
david also wore a robe made from fine linen.
he also wore an ephod made of fine linen.
so all the israelites joined in bringing up the box of the lord’s agreement.
they shouted, they blew rams’ horns and trumpets, and they played cymbals, lyres, and harps.
when the box of the lord’s agreement arrived at the city of david, saul’s daughter michal looked through a window.
when she saw king david dancing and playing, she lost her respect for him.
song of songs.
chapter 1.
solomon’s most wonderful song.
cover me with kisses, for your love is better than wine.
your perfume smells wonderful, but your name is sweeter than the best perfume.
that is why the young women love you.
take me with you.
let’s run away.
the king took me into his room.
we will rejoice and be happy for you.
remember, your love is better than wine.
with good reason, the young women love you.
daughters of jerusalem, i am dark and beautiful, as black as the tents of kedar and salma.
don’t look at how dark i am, at how dark the sun has made me.
my brothers were angry with me.
they forced me to take care of their vineyards, so i could not take care of myself.
i love you with all my soul!
tell me, where do you feed your sheep?
where do you lay them down at noon?
i should come to be with you or i will be like a hired woman caring for the sheep of your friends.
you are such a beautiful woman.
surely you know what to do.
go, follow the sheep.
feed your young goats near the shepherds’ tents.
my darling, you are more exciting to me than any mare among the stallions pulling pharaoh’s chariots.
your cheeks are so beautiful with those ornaments hanging beside them.
your neck is so lovely under that beautiful string of jewels.
let’s make you some more gold jewelry and decorate it with silver.
the smell of my perfume reaches out to the king lying on his couch.
my lover is like the small bag of myrrh around my neck, lying all night between my breasts.
my lover is like a bunch of henna flowers near the vineyards of en gedi.
my darling, you are so beautiful!
oh, you are beautiful!
your eyes are like doves.
you are so handsome, my lover!
yes, and so charming!
our bed is so fresh and pleasant.
the beams of our house are cedar.
the rafters are fir.
1 kings.
chapter 15.
abijah became the new king of judah during the 18th year that jeroboam son of nebat ruled israel.
abijah ruled in jerusalem for three years.
his mother’s name was maacah.
she was absalom’s daughter.
he did all the same sins that his father before him had done.
abijah was not faithful to the lord his god.
in this way he was not like his grandfather, david.
but for david’s sake, the lord gave abijah a kingdom in jerusalem and allowed him to have a son.
he also kept jerusalem safe.
david had always done what the lord said was right.
he had always obeyed his commands.
the only time david did not obey the lord was when he sinned against uriah the hittite.
rehoboam and jeroboam were always fighting against each other.
the rest of what abijah did is written in the book, the history of the kings of judah.
there was war between abijah and jeroboam during the whole time that abijah was king.
when abijah died, he was buried in the city of david.
abijah’s son asa became the new king after him.
during jeroboam’s 20th year as king over israel, asa became king of judah.
he ruled in jerusalem for 41 years.
his grandmother’s name was maacah, and she was the daughter of absalom.
asa did what the lord said is right, as his ancestor david did.
during asa’s time there were men who served other gods by selling their bodies for sex.
asa forced them to leave the country.
he took away the idols that his ancestors had made.
king asa also took away the right of his mother maacah to be queen mother.
he did this because she had set up one of those awful asherah poles.
asa cut down the pole and burned it in the kidron valley.
asa did not destroy the high places, even though he was faithful to the lord all his life.
asa and his father had given some special gifts to god.
asa put these gifts of gold, silver, and other things in the lord’s temple.
the whole time that king asa was king of judah, he fought a war against king baasha of israel.
once baasha attacked judah and then built up the city of ramah to keep asa from leaving judah on any kind of military campaign.
so asa took gold and silver from the treasuries of the lord’s temple and the king’s palace.
he gave it to his officials and sent them to king ben-hadad of aram.
ben-hadad was the son of tabrimmon.
tabrimmon was the son of hezion.
damascus was ben-hadad’s capital city.
asa sent this message: “my father and your father had a peace agreement.
now i want to make a peace agreement with you.
i am sending you this gift of gold and silver.
please break your treaty with king baasha of israel and make him leave us alone.” 
king ben-hadad made the agreement with king asa and sent his army to fight against the israelite towns of ijon, dan, abel beth maacah, the towns near lake galilee, and the area of naphtali.
when baasha heard about these attacks, he stopped building up ramah and went back to tirzah.
then king asa gave an order to all the men in judah.
everyone had to help.
they had to go to ramah and carry out all the stone and wood that baasha was using to build up the city.
they carried the material to geba in benjamin and to mizpah and used it to strengthen those two cities.
all the other things about asa—the great things he did and the cities he built—are written in the book, the history of the kings of judah.
when asa became old, his feet became infected.
he died and was buried in the city of david, his ancestor.
then asa’s son jehoshaphat became the new king after him.
during asa’s second year as king of judah, jeroboam’s son nadab became king of israel.
nadab ruled over israel for two years.
he did what the lord said was wrong.
he sinned just as his father jeroboam did when he caused the israelites to sin.
baasha was the son of ahijah.
they were from the tribe of issachar.
baasha made a plan to kill king nadab.
nadab and all israel were fighting against the philistine town of gibbethon.
and that is where baasha killed nadab.
this happened during asa’s third year as king of judah.
so baasha became the next king of israel.
when baasha became the new king, he killed everyone in jeroboam’s family.
he left no one in jeroboam’s family alive.
this happened just as the lord said it would when he spoke through his servant ahijah at shiloh.
this happened because king jeroboam had committed many sins and had caused the israelites to sin.
this made the lord, the god of israel, very angry.
the other things that nadab did are written in the book, the history of the kings of israel.
all during the time that baasha ruled over israel, he was fighting wars against king asa of judah.
ahijah’s son baasha became king of israel during the third year that asa ruled over judah.
baasha ruled in tirzah for 24 years, 
but he did what the lord said was wrong.
he did the same sins that jeroboam had done that caused the israelites to sin.
chapter 7.
moses finished setting up the holy tent.
on that day he dedicated it to god.
moses anointed the tent and everything in it.
he also anointed the altar and all the things used with it.
then the leaders of israel gave offerings to god.
these men were the heads of their families and leaders of their tribes.
these were the same men who were in charge of counting the people.
these leaders brought gifts and gave them to the lord in front of the holy tent.
they brought six covered wagons and twelve oxen for pulling the wagons.
each leader gave an ox and joined with another leader to give a wagon.
the lord said to moses, 
“accept these gifts from the leaders.
these gifts can be used in the work of the meeting tent.
give them to the levites to help them do their work.” 
so moses accepted the wagons and the oxen and gave them to the levites.
he gave two wagons and four oxen to the men in gershon’s group.
they needed the wagons and the oxen for their work.
then moses gave four wagons and eight oxen to the men in merari’s group.
they needed the wagons and oxen for their work.
ithamar son of aaron the priest was responsible for the work of all these men.
moses did not give any oxen or wagons to the men in kohath’s group, because their job was to carry the holy things on their shoulders.
when moses anointed the altar, the leaders brought offerings for its dedication.
they gave their offerings to the lord at the altar.
the lord told moses, “each day one leader must bring his gift for the dedication of the altar.” 
each of the twelve leaders brought these gifts: each leader brought one silver plate that weighed about 3 1/4 pounds.
each leader brought one silver bowl that weighed about 1 3/4 pounds.
both of these gifts were weighed by the official measure.
the bowl and the plate were each filled with fine flour mixed with oil.
this was to be used as a grain offering.
each leader also brought a large gold spoon that weighed about 4 ounces.
the spoon was filled with incense.
each leader also brought 1 young bull, 1 ram, and 1 male lamb a year old.
these animals were for a burnt offering.
each leader also brought 1 male goat to be used as a sin offering.
each leader brought 2 cattle, 5 rams, 5 male goats, and 5 male lambs a year old.
all of them were sacrificed for a fellowship offering.
on the first day, the leader of the tribe of judah, nahshon son of amminadab brought his gifts.
on the second day, the leader of the tribe of issachar, nethanel son of zuar brought his gifts.
on the third day, the leader of the tribe of zebulun, eliab son of helon brought his gifts.
on the fourth day, the leader of the tribe of reuben, elizur son of shedeur brought his gifts.
on the fifth day, the leader of the tribe of simeon, shelumiel son of zurishaddai brought his gifts.
on the sixth day, the leader of the tribe of gad, eliasaph son of deuel brought his gifts.
on the seventh day, the leader of the tribe of ephraim, elishama son of ammihud brought his gifts.
on the eighth day, the leader of the tribe of manasseh, gamaliel son of pedahzur brought his gifts.
on the ninth day, the leader of the tribe of benjamin, abidan son of gideoni brought his gifts.
on the tenth day, the leader of the tribe of dan, ahiezer son of ammishaddai brought his gifts.
on the eleventh day, the leader of the tribe of asher, pagiel son of ocran brought his gifts.
on the twelfth day, the leader of the tribe of naphtali, ahira son of enan brought his gifts.
so all these things were the gifts from the leaders of the israelites.
they brought them during the time that moses dedicated the altar by anointing it.
they brought 12 silver plates, 12 silver bowls, and 12 gold spoons.
each silver plate weighed about 3 1/4 pounds.
and each bowl weighed about 1 3/4 pounds.
the silver plates and the silver bowls together all weighed about 60 pounds, using the official measure.
the 12 gold spoons filled with incense weighed 4 ounces each, using the official measure.
the 12 gold spoons all together weighed about 3 pounds.
the total number of animals for the burnt offering was 12 bulls, 12 rams, and 12 one-year-old male lambs.
there were also the grain offerings that must be given with these offerings.
and there were 12 male goats to be used for a sin offering.
the leaders also gave animals to be killed and used as a fellowship offering.
the total number of these animals was 24 bulls, 60 rams, 60 male goats, and 60 one-year-old male lambs.
in this way they dedicated the altar after moses anointed it.
when moses went into the meeting tent to speak to the lord, he heard the lord’s voice speaking to him.
the voice was coming from the area between the two cherub angels on the mercy-cover on top of the box of the agreement.
in this way the lord spoke to moses.
chapter 12.
to the director: with the sheminith.
a song of david.
save me, lord!
we can no longer trust anyone!
all the good, loyal people are gone.
people lie to their neighbors.
they say whatever they think people want to hear.
the lord should cut off their lying lips and cut out their bragging tongues.
those people think they can win any argument.
they say, “we are so good with words, no one will be our master.” 
they took advantage of the poor and stole what little they had.
but the lord knows what they did, and he says, “i will rescue those who are poor and helpless, and i will punish those who hurt them.” 
the lord’s words are true and pure, like silver purified by fire, like silver melted seven times to make it perfectly pure.
lord, take care of the helpless.
protect them forever from the wicked people in this world.
the wicked are all around us, and everyone thinks evil is something to be praised!
1 chronicles.
chapter 27.
this is the list of the israelites who served the king in the army.
each group was on duty one month each year.
there were rulers of families, captains, generals, and the court officers who served the king.
each army group had 24,000 men.
jashobeam son of zabdiel was in charge of the first group for the first month.
there were 24,000 men in jashobeam’s group.
jashobeam, one of perez’s descendants, was leader of all the army officers for the first month.
dodai, from the ahoahites, was in charge of the army group for the second month.
mikloth was a leader in that group.
there were 24,000 men in dodai’s group.
the third commander, for the third month, was benaiah son of jehoiada the leading priest.
there were 24,000 men in benaiah’s group.
he was the same benaiah who was a brave soldier from the thirty heroes.
he led these men.
his son ammizabad was in charge of banaiah’s group.
the fourth commander, for the fourth month, was asahel the brother of joab.
later, asahel’s son zebadiah took his place as commander.
there were 24,000 men in asahel’s group.
the fifth commander, for the fifth month, was shamhuth from zerah’s family.
there were 24,000 men in shamhuth’s group.
the sixth commander, for the sixth month, was ira son of ikkesh from the town of tekoa.
there were 24,000 men in ira’s group.
the seventh commander, for the seventh month, was helez from the pelonites and a descendant of ephraim.
there were 24,000 men in helez’s group.
the eighth commander, for the eighth month, was sibbecai from hushah and from zerah’s family.
there were 24,000 men in sibbecai’s group.
the ninth commander, for the ninth month, was abiezer from the town of anathoth and the tribe of benjamin.
there were 24,000 men in abiezer’s group.
the tenth commander, for the tenth month, was maharai from netophah and from zerah’s family.
there were 24,000 men in maharai’s group.
the eleventh commander, for the eleventh month, was benaiah from pirathon and the tribe of ephraim.
there were 24,000 men in benaiah’s group.
the twelfth commander, for the twelfth month, was heldai from netophah and from othniel’s family.
there were 24,000 men in heldai’s group.
these were the leaders of the tribes of israel: eliezer son of zicri, leader of the tribe of reuben; shephatiah son of maacah, leader of the tribe of simeon; 
hashabiah son of kemuel, leader of the tribe of levi; zadok, leader of the people of aaron; 
elihu, one of david’s brothers, leader of the tribe of judah; omri son of michael, leader of the tribe of issachar; 
ishmaiah son of obadiah, leader of the tribe of zebulun; jeremoth son of azriel, leader of the tribe of naphtali; 
hoshea son of azaziah, leader of the tribe of ephraim; joel son of pedaiah, leader of west manasseh; 
iddo son of zechariah, leader of east manasseh; jaasiel son of abner, leader of the tribe of benjamin; 
azarel son of jeroham, leader of the tribe of dan.
these were the leaders of the tribes of israel.
david decided to count the men in israel.
there were very many people because the lord had promised to make the israelites as many as the stars in the sky.
so david counted only the men who were 20 years old and older.
joab son of zeruiah began to count the people, but he did not finish.
god became angry with the israelites.
that is why the number of the people was not put in the book, the history of king david.
this is the list of men who were responsible for the king’s property: azmaveth son of adiel was in charge of the king’s storerooms.
jonathan son of uzziah was in charge of the storerooms in the small towns, villages, fields, and towers.
ezri son of kelub was in charge of the field workers.
shimei from ramah was in charge of the vineyards.
zabdi from shepham was in charge of the storage and care of the wine that came from the vineyards.
baal hanan from geder was in charge of the olive trees and sycamore trees in the western hill country.
joash was in charge of storing the olive oil.
shitrai from sharon was in charge of the cattle around sharon.
shaphat son of adlai was in charge of the cattle in the valleys.
obil the ishmaelite was in charge of the camels.
jehdeiah the meronothite was in charge of the donkeys.
jaziz the hagrite was in charge of the sheep.
all these men were the leaders who took care of king david’s property.
jonathan was a wise counselor and a scribe.
he was david’s uncle.
jehiel son of hacmoni took care of the king’s sons.
ahithophel was the king’s counselor.
hushai was the king’s friend.
hushai was from the arkites.
jehoiada and abiathar later took ahithophel’s place as the king’s counselor.
jehoiada was benaiah’s son.
joab was the commander of the king’s army.
chapter 9.
the lord spoke to moses in the desert of sinai.
this was during the first month of the second year after the israelites came out of egypt.
he said to moses, 
“tell the israelites to celebrate passover at the chosen time.
they must eat the passover meal just before dark on the 14th day of this month.
they must do this at the chosen time, and they must follow all the rules about passover.” 
so moses told the israelites to celebrate passover.
the people did this in the desert of sinai just before dark on the 14th day of the first month.
the israelites did everything just as the lord commanded moses.
but some of the people could not celebrate passover that day.
they were unclean because they had touched a dead body.
so they went to moses and aaron that day 
and said to moses, “we touched a dead body and became unclean.
but why must we be kept from offering our gifts to the lord at the chosen time with the rest of the israelites?” 
moses said to them, “i will ask the lord what he says about this.” 
then the lord said to moses, 
“tell the israelites this: it might happen sometimes that you or your descendants cannot celebrate the lord’s passover at the right time.
someone might be unclean because they touched a dead body, or they might be away on a trip.
they will still be able to celebrate passover at another time.
they must celebrate passover just before dark on the 14th day of the second month.
at that time they must eat the lamb, the bread made without yeast, and the bitter herbs.
they must not leave any of that food until the next morning.
and they must not break any of the bones of the lamb.
they must follow all the rules about passover.
but anyone who is able must celebrate passover at the right time.
if they are clean and they are not away on a trip, there is no excuse for them not to do it.
if they don’t celebrate passover at the right time, they must be separated from their people.
they are guilty and must be punished, because they did not give the lord his gift at the right time.
“a foreigner living among you might want to share in the lord’s passover with you.
this is allowed, but that person must follow all the rules about passover.
the same rules are for everyone.” 
on the day the holy tent, the tent of the agreement, was set up, a cloud covered it.
at night the cloud over the holy tent looked like fire.
the cloud stayed over the holy tent all the time.
and at night the cloud looked like fire.
when the cloud moved from its place over the holy tent, the israelites followed it.
when the cloud stopped, that is the place where the israelites camped.
this was the way the lord showed the israelites when to move and when to stop and set up camp.
while the cloud stayed over the holy tent, the people continued to camp in that same place.
sometimes the cloud would stay over the holy tent for a long time.
the israelites obeyed the lord and did not move.
sometimes the cloud was over the holy tent for only a few days.
so the people obeyed the lord’s command—they followed the cloud when it moved.
sometimes the cloud stayed only during the night—the next morning the cloud moved.
so the people gathered their things and followed it.
if the cloud moved, during the day or during the night, they followed it.
if the cloud stayed over the holy tent for two days, a month, or a year, the people stayed at that place.
they did not leave until the cloud moved.
when the cloud rose from its place and moved, they also moved.
so the people obeyed the lord’s commands.
they camped when the lord told them to, and they moved when he told them to.
they watched carefully and obeyed the lord’s commands to moses.
chapter 10.
the lord said to moses, 
“make two trumpets.
use silver and hammer it to make the trumpets.
these trumpets will be for calling the people together and for telling them when it is time to move the camp.
if you blow long blasts on both trumpets, all the people must meet together at the entrance of the meeting tent.
but if you blow long blasts on only one trumpet, only the leaders will come to meet with you.
(these are the leaders of the twelve tribes of israel.)
“short blasts on the trumpets will be the way to tell the people to move the camp.
the first time you blow a short blast on the trumpets, the tribes camping on the east side of the meeting tent must begin to move.
the second time you blow a short blast on the trumpets, the tribes camping on the south side of the meeting tent will begin to move.
but if you want to gather the people together for a special meeting, blow the trumpets in a different way—blow a long steady blast on the trumpets.
only aaron’s sons, the priests, should blow the trumpets.
this is a law for you that will continue forever, for generations to come.
“if you are fighting an enemy in your own land, blow loudly on the trumpets before you go to fight them.
the lord your god will hear you, and he will save you from your enemies.
also blow these trumpets for your special meetings, new moon celebrations, and all your happy times together.
blow the trumpets when you give your burnt offerings and fellowship offerings.
this will be a special way for your god to remember you.
i command you to do this; i am the lord your god.” 
on the 20th day of the second month of the second year after the israelites left egypt, the cloud rose from above the tent of the agreement.
so the israelites began their journey.
they left the desert of sinai and traveled until the cloud stopped in the desert of paran.
this was the first time the people moved their camp.
they moved it the way the lord commanded moses.
the three divisions from judah’s camp went first.
they traveled under their flag.
the first group was the tribe of judah.
nahshon son of amminadab was the commander of that group.
next came the tribe of issachar.
nethanel son of zuar was the commander of that group.
and then came the tribe of zebulun.
eliab son of helon was the commander of that group.
then the holy tent was taken down.
and the men from the gershon and the merari families carried the holy tent.
so the people from these families were next in line.
then came the three divisions from reuben’s camp.
they traveled under their flag.
the first group was the tribe of reuben.
elizur son of shedeur was the commander of that group.
next came the tribe of simeon.
shelumiel son of zurishaddai was the commander of that group.
and then came the tribe of gad.
eliasaph son of deuel was the commander of that group.
then came the kohath family.
they carried the holy things from inside the holy tent.
these people came at this time so that the other people could set up the holy tent and make it ready at the new camp before these people arrived.
next came the three groups from ephraim’s camp.
they traveled under their flag.
the first group was the tribe of ephraim.
elishama son of ammihud was the commander of that group.
next came the tribe of manasseh.
gamaliel son of pedahzur was the commander of that group.
then came the tribe of benjamin.
abidan son of gideoni was the commander of that group.
the last three tribes in the line were the rear guard for all the other tribes.
these were the groups from dan’s camp.
they traveled under their flag.
the first group was the tribe of dan.
ahiezer son of ammishaddai was their commander.
next came the tribe of asher.
pagiel son of ocran was the commander of that group.
then came the tribe of naphtali.
ahira son of enan was the commander of that group.
that was the way the israelites marched when they moved from place to place.
hobab was the son of reuel, the midianite.
(reuel was moses’ father-in-law.)
moses said to hobab, “we are traveling to the land that the lord promised to give to us.
come with us and we will be good to you.
the lord has promised good things to the israelites.” 
but hobab answered, “no, i will not go with you.
i will go back to my homeland and to my own people.” 
then moses said, “please don’t leave us.
you know more about the desert than we do.
you can be our guide.
if you come with us, we will share with you all the good things that the lord gives us.” 
so they began traveling from the mountain of the lord.
the priests took the box of the lord’s agreement and walked in front of the people.
they carried the holy box for three days, looking for a place to camp.
the lord’s cloud was over them every day.
and when they left their camp every morning, the cloud was there to lead them.
when the people lifted the holy box to move the camp, moses always said, “get up, lord!
may your enemies be scattered.
may your enemies run away from you.” 
and when the holy box was put in its place, moses always said, “come back, lord, to the millions of israelites.” 
jeremiah.
chapter 36.
the message from the lord came to jeremiah.
this was during the fourth year that jehoiakim son of josiah was king of judah.
this was the message from the lord: 
“jeremiah, get a scroll and write on it all the messages i have spoken to you.
i have spoken to you about the nations of israel and judah and all the other nations.
write all the words that i have spoken to you from the time that josiah was king, until now.
maybe the people of judah will hear what i am planning to do to them and will stop doing bad things.
if they will do that, i will forgive them for the terrible sins they have committed.” 
so jeremiah called a man named baruch son of neriah.
jeremiah spoke the messages the lord had given him.
while he spoke, baruch wrote the messages on the scroll.
then jeremiah said to baruch, “i cannot go to the lord’s temple.
i am not allowed to go there.
so i want you to go to the temple of the lord.
go there on a day of fasting and read to the people from the scroll.
read to the people the messages from the lord that you wrote on the scroll as i spoke them to you.
read them to all the people of judah who come into jerusalem from the towns where they live.
perhaps they will ask the lord to help them.
perhaps each person will stop doing bad things.
the lord has announced that he is very angry with them.” 
so baruch son of neriah did everything jeremiah the prophet told him to do.
baruch read aloud the scroll that had the lord’s messages written on it.
he read it in the lord’s temple.
in the ninth month of the fifth year that jehoiakim was king, a fast was announced.
all those who lived in the city of jerusalem and everyone who had come into jerusalem from the towns of judah were supposed to fast before the lord.
at that time baruch read the scroll that contained jeremiah’s words.
he read the scroll in the temple of the lord to all the people who were there.
baruch was in the room of gemariah in the upper courtyard when he read from the scroll.
that room was located at the entrance of the new gate of the temple.
gemariah was the son of shaphan.
gemariah was a scribe in the temple.
a man named micaiah heard all the messages from the lord that baruch read from the scroll.
micaiah was the son of gemariah, the son of shaphan.
when micaiah heard the messages from the scroll, he went down to the secretary’s room in the king’s palace.
all the royal officials were sitting there in the king’s palace.
these are the names of the officials: elishama the secretary, delaiah son of shemaiah, elnathan son of acbor, gemariah son of shaphan, zedekiah son of hananiah; all the other royal officials were there too.
micaiah told them everything he had heard baruch read from the scroll.
then all the officials sent a man named jehudi to baruch.
(jehudi was the son of nethaniah, son of shelemiah.
shelemiah was the son of cushi.)
jehudi said to baruch, “bring the scroll that you read from and come with me.” baruch son of neriah took the scroll and went with jehudi to the officials.
then the officials said to baruch, “sit down and read the scroll to us.” so baruch read the scroll to them.
when the royal officials heard all the messages from the scroll, they were afraid and looked at one another.
they said to baruch, “we must tell king jehoiakim about these messages on the scroll.” 
then the officials asked baruch, “tell us, baruch, where did you get these messages that you wrote on the scroll?
did you write down what jeremiah said to you?” 
“yes,” baruch answered.
“jeremiah spoke, and i wrote down all the messages with ink on this scroll.” 
then the royal officials said to baruch, “you and jeremiah must go and hide.
don’t tell anyone where you are hiding.” 
then the royal officials put the scroll in the room of elishama the scribe.
they went to king jehoiakim and told him all about the scroll.
so king jehoiakim sent jehudi to get the scroll.
jehudi brought the scroll from the room of elishama the scribe.
then jehudi read the scroll to the king and all the servants who stood around the king.
the time this happened was in the ninth month, so king jehoiakim was sitting in the part of the palace used for winter.
there was a fire burning in a small fireplace in front of the king.
jehudi began to read from the scroll.
but after he would read two or three columns, king jehoiakim would grab the scroll.
then he would cut those columns off the scroll with a small knife and throw them into the fireplace.
finally, the whole scroll was burned in the fire.
and, when king jehoiakim and his servants heard the message from the scroll, they were not afraid.
they did not tear their clothes to show sorrow for doing wrong.
elnathan, delaiah, and gemariah tried to talk king jehoiakim out of burning the scroll, but he would not listen to them.
instead king jehoiakim commanded some men to arrest baruch the scribe and jeremiah the prophet.
these men were jerahmeel, a son of the king, seraiah son of azriel, and shelemiah son of abdeel.
but they could not find baruch and jeremiah, because the lord had hidden them.
king jehoiakim burned the scroll on which baruch had written all the words that jeremiah had spoken to him.
then this message from the lord came to jeremiah: 
“get another scroll.
write all the messages on it that were on the first scroll that king jehoiakim of judah burned.
also tell king jehoiakim of judah that this is what the lord says: ‘jehoiakim, you burned that scroll.
you said, “why did jeremiah write that the king of babylon will surely come and destroy this land and kill all the people and animals in it?” 
so this is what the lord says about king jehoiakim of judah: jehoiakim’s descendants will not sit on david’s throne.
when jehoiakim dies, he will not get a king’s funeral, but his body will be thrown out on the ground.
his body will be left out in the heat of the day and the cold frost of the night.
i will punish jehoiakim and his children, and i will punish his officials.
i will do this because they are wicked.
i will bring terrible disasters on them and on all those who live in jerusalem and on the people from judah.
i will bring all these bad things on them, just as i warned them, because they have not listened to me.’” 
then jeremiah took another scroll and gave it to baruch son of neriah, the scribe.
as jeremiah spoke, baruch wrote on the scroll the same messages that were on the scroll that king jehoiakim had burned in the fire.
and many other words like those messages were added to the second scroll.
chapter 3.
this is the family history of aaron and moses at the time the lord talked to moses on mount sinai.
aaron had four sons.
nadab was the firstborn son.
then there were abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.
these sons were the chosen priests.
they were given the special work of serving the lord as priests.
but nadab and abihu died while serving the lord.
they used fire that the lord did not allow when they made an offering to him.
so nadab and abihu died there, in the desert of sinai.
they had no sons, so eleazar and ithamar took their place and served the lord as priests.
this happened while their father aaron was still alive.
the lord said to moses, 
“bring all the men from the tribe of levi.
bring them to aaron the priest.
these men will be his helpers.
the levites will help him when he serves at the meeting tent.
and they will help all the israelites when they come to worship at the holy tent.
the israelites should protect everything in the meeting tent; it is their duty.
but the levites will serve the israelites by caring for these things.
this will be their way of serving at the holy tent.
“give the levites to aaron and his sons.
the levites were chosen from all the israelites to help aaron and his sons.
“appoint aaron and his sons to be priests.
they must do their duty and serve as priests.
anyone else who tries to come near the holy things must be killed.” 
the lord also said to moses, 
“i destroyed all the firstborn in egypt.
at that time i chose all the firstborn from every family in israel to be mine in a special way.
that included all the firstborn men and animals.
but now i am choosing the levites to take their place.
now they will be my special servants.
i, the lord, give this command!” 
the lord again said to moses in the desert of sinai, 
“count all the families and family groups in the tribe of levi.
count every man or boy who is one month old or older.” 
so moses obeyed the lord.
he counted them all.
levi had three sons.
their names were gershon, kohath, and merari.
each son was the leader of several family groups.
the gershon family groups were libni and shimei.
the kohath family groups were amram, izhar, hebron, and uzziel.
the merari family groups were mahli and mushi.
these are the families that belonged to levi’s family group.
the families of libni and shimei belonged to the family of gershon.
they were the gershonite family groups.
there were 7500 men and boys over one month old in these two family groups.
the gershonite family groups were told to camp in the west.
they made their camp behind the holy tent.
the leader of the family groups of the gershonites was eliasaph son of lael.
in the meeting tent, the gershonites had the job of taking care of the holy tent, the outer tent, and the covering.
they also took care of the curtain at the entrance of the meeting tent.
they cared for the curtain in the courtyard.
and they cared for the curtain at the entrance of the courtyard.
this courtyard was around the holy tent and the altar.
and they cared for the ropes and for everything that was used with the curtains.
the families of amram, izhar, hebron, and uzziel belonged to the family of kohath.
they were the kohathite family groups.
in this family group there were 8300 men and boys a month old or over.
the kohathites were given the job of taking care of the things in the holy place.
the kohathite family groups were given the area to the south of the holy tent.
this was the area where they camped.
the leader of the kohathite family groups was elizaphan son of uzziel.
their job was to take care of the holy box, the table, the lampstand, the altars, and the dishes of the holy place.
they also cared for the curtain and all the things that were used with the curtain.
the leader over the leaders of the levites was eleazar son of aaron the priest.
eleazar was in charge of everyone who took care of the holy things.
the family groups of mahli and mushi belonged to the merari family.
there were 6200 men and boys who were one month old or older in the mahli family group.
the leader of the merari family group was zuriel son of abihail.
this family group was given the area to the north of the holy tent.
this is the area where they camped.
the people from the merari family were given the job of caring for the frames of the holy tent.
they cared for all the braces, posts, bases, and everything that was used with the frames of the holy tent.
they also cared for all the posts in the courtyard around the holy tent.
this included all the bases, tent pegs, and ropes.
moses, aaron, and his sons camped east of the holy tent, in front of the meeting tent.
they were given the work of caring for the holy place.
they did this for all the israelites.
anyone else who came near the holy place was to be killed.
the lord commanded moses and aaron to count all the men and boys one month old or older in levi’s family group.
the total number was 22,000. 
the lord said to moses, “count all the firstborn men and boys in israel who are at least one month old.
write their names on a list.
i am the lord.
i will take the levites instead of all the firstborn men and boys of israel.
i will also take the animals from the levites instead of taking all the firstborn animals from the other people in israel.” 
so moses did what the lord commanded.
he counted all the firstborn children of the israelites.
he listed all the firstborn men and boys who were one month old or older.
there were 22,273 names on that list.
the lord also said to moses, 
“i, the lord, give this command: ‘take the levites instead of all the firstborn men from the other families of israel.
and i will take the animals of the levites instead of the animals of the other people.
the levites are mine.
there are 22,000 levites, but there are 22,273 firstborn sons from the other families.
this leaves 273 more firstborn sons than levites.
using the official measure, collect five shekels of silver for each of the 273 people.
(the shekel by the official measure weighs 20 gerahs.)
collect that silver from the israelites.
give the silver to aaron and his sons as payment for the 273 israelites.’” 
there were not enough levites to take the place of all the men from the other family groups, so moses gathered the money for them.
moses collected the silver from the firstborn men of the israelites.
he collected 1365 shekels of silver, using the official measure.
moses obeyed the lord’s command and gave the silver to aaron and his sons.
he did it just as the lord had told him.
chapter 4.
jonah was not happy that god saved the city.
jonah became angry.
he complained to the lord and said, “lord, i knew this would happen!
i was in my own country, and you told me to come here.
at that time i knew that you would forgive the people of this evil city, so i decided to run away to tarshish.
i knew that you are a kind god.
i knew that you show mercy and don’t want to punish people.
i knew that you are kind, and if these people stopped sinning, you would change your plans to destroy them.
so now, lord, just kill me.
it is better for me to die than to live.” 
then the lord said, “do you think it is right for you to be angry?” 
jonah went out of the city to a place near the city on the east side.
he made a shelter for himself and sat there in the shade, waiting to see what would happen to the city.
the lord made a gourd plant grow quickly over jonah.
this made a cool place for jonah to sit and helped him to be more comfortable.
he was very happy because of this plant.
the next morning, god sent a worm to eat part of the plant.
the worm began eating the plant, and the plant died.
after the sun was high in the sky, god caused a hot east wind to blow.
the sun became very hot on jonah’s head, and he became very weak.
he asked god to let him die.
he said, “it is better for me to die than to live.” 
but god said to jonah, “do you think it is right for you to be angry just because this plant died?” jonah answered, “yes, it is right for me to be angry!
i am angry enough to die!” 
and the lord said, “you did nothing for that plant.
you did not make it grow.
it grew up in the night, and the next day it died.
and now you are sad about it.
if you can get upset over a plant, surely i can feel sorry for a big city like nineveh.
there are many people and animals in that city.
there are more than 120,000 people there who did not know they were doing wrong.” 
2 samuel.
chapter 14.
joab son of zeruiah knew that king david missed absalom very much.
so joab sent messengers to tekoa to bring a wise woman from there.
joab said to this wise woman, “please pretend to be very sad.
put on sackcloth.
don’t dress up.
act like a woman who has been crying many days for someone who died.
go to the king and talk to him using these words that i tell you.” then joab told the wise woman what to say.
then the woman from tekoa talked to the king.
she bowed with her face to the ground.
then she said, “king, please help me!” 
king david said to her, “what’s your problem?” the woman said, “i am a widow.
my husband is dead.
i had two sons.
they were out in the field fighting.
there was no one to stop them.
one son killed the other son.
now the whole family is against me.
they said to me, ‘bring us the son who killed his brother and we will kill him, because he killed his brother.’ my son is like the last spark of a fire.
if they kill my son, that fire will burn out and be finished.
he is the only son left alive to get his father’s property.
so my dead husband’s property will go to someone else and his name will be removed from the land.” 
then the king said to the woman, “go home.
i will take care of things for you.” 
the woman of tekoa said to the king, “let the blame be on me, my lord and king.
you and your kingdom are innocent.” 
king david said, “if anyone is saying bad things to you, bring them to me.
they will not bother you again.” 
the woman said, “please, use the name of the lord your god and swear that you will stop these people.
they want to punish my son for murdering his brother.
swear that you will not let them destroy my son.” david said, “as the lord lives, no one will hurt your son.
not even one hair from your son’s head will fall to the ground.” 
the woman said, “my lord and king, please let me say something else to you.” the king said, “speak.” 
then the woman said, “why have you planned these things against the people of god?
when you say these things, you show you are guilty because you have not brought back the son who you forced to leave home.
we will all die some day.
we will be like water that is spilled on the ground.
no one can gather this water back from the ground.
you know god forgives people.
god made plans for people who are forced to run away for safety—god does not force them to run away from him!
my lord and king, i came to say these words to you, because the people made me afraid.
i said to myself, ‘i will talk to the king.
maybe the king will help me.
the king will listen to me and save me from the man who wants to kill me and my son.
that man just wants to keep us from getting what god gave us.’ 
i know that the words of my lord the king will give me rest, because you are like an angel from god.
you know what is good and what is bad.
and the lord your god is with you.” 
king david answered the woman, “you must answer the question i will ask you.” the woman said, “my lord and king, please ask your question.” 
the king said, “did joab tell you to say all these things?” the woman answered, “as you live, my lord and king, you are right.
your officer joab did tell me to say these things.
joab did this so that you would see things differently.
my lord, you are as wise as god’s angel.
you know everything that happens on earth.” 
the king said to joab, “look, i will do what i promised.
now please bring back the young man absalom.” 
joab bowed with his face on the ground.
he blessed king david, and said, “today i know that you are pleased with me.
i know because you have done what i asked.” 
then joab got up and went to geshur and brought absalom to jerusalem.
but king david said, “absalom must go back to his own house.
he cannot come to see me.” so absalom went back to his own house, but he could not go to see the king.
people really bragged about how good-looking absalom was.
no man in israel was as handsome as absalom.
every part of his body was perfect—from his head to his feet.
at the end of every year, absalom cut the hair from his head and weighed it.
the hair weighed about five pounds.
absalom had three sons and one daughter.
her name was tamar, and she was a beautiful woman.
absalom lived in jerusalem for two full years without being allowed to visit king david.
absalom sent a message to joab, asking for permission to see the king, but joab refused to come see him.
so absalom sent a second message to joab.
again, joab refused to come see him.
then absalom said to his servants, “look, joab’s field is next to my field.
he has barley growing in that field.
go burn the barley.” so absalom’s servants went and started a fire in joab’s field.
joab got up and came to absalom’s house.
he said to him, “why did your servants burn my field?” 
absalom said to joab, “i sent a message to you.
i asked you to come here.
i wanted to send you to the king to ask him why he asked me to come home from geshur.
i cannot see him, so it would have been better for me to stay in geshur.
now let me see the king.
if i have sinned, he can kill me!” 
then joab came to the king and told him what absalom said.
the king called for absalom.
absalom came to the king and bowed low on the ground before the king.
the king kissed him.
2 kings.
chapter 18.
hezekiah son of ahaz was king of judah.
hezekiah began to rule during the third year that hoshea son of elah was king of israel.
hezekiah was 25 years old when he began to rule.
he ruled 29 years in jerusalem.
his mother’s name was abi, the daughter of zechariah.
hezekiah did what the lord said was right, just as david his ancestor had done.
hezekiah destroyed the high places.
he broke the memorial stones and cut down the asherah poles.
at that time the israelites burned incense to the bronze snake made by moses.
this bronze snake was called “nehushtan.” hezekiah broke this bronze snake into pieces.
hezekiah trusted in the lord, the god of israel.
there was no one like hezekiah among all the kings of judah before him or after him.
he was very faithful to the lord and did not stop following him.
he obeyed the commands that the lord had given to moses.
the lord was with hezekiah, so he was successful in everything he did.
hezekiah broke away from the king of assyria and stopped serving him.
hezekiah defeated the philistines all the way to gaza and the area around it.
he defeated all the philistine cities—from the smallest town to the largest city.
king shalmaneser of assyria went to fight against samaria.
his army surrounded the city.
this happened during the fourth year that hezekiah was king of judah.
(this was also the seventh year that hoshea son of elah was king of israel.)
at the end of the third year, shalmaneser captured samaria.
he took samaria during the sixth year that hezekiah was king of judah.
(this was also the ninth year that hoshea was king of israel.)
the king of assyria took the israelites as prisoners to assyria.
he made them live in halah, on the habor (the river of gozan), and in the cities of the medes.
this happened because the israelites did not obey the lord their god.
they broke his agreement and did not obey everything that moses, the lord’s servant, had commanded.
the israelites would not listen to the lord’s agreement, or do what it taught them to do.
during hezekiah’s 14th year as king, king sennacherib of assyria went to fight against all the strong cities of judah.
sennacherib defeated them all.
then king hezekiah of judah sent a message to the king of assyria at lachish.
hezekiah said, “i have done wrong.
leave me alone, and i will pay whatever you want.” then the king of assyria told king hezekiah of judah to pay over 11 tons of silver and over 1 ton of gold.
hezekiah gave all the silver that was in the lord’s temple and in the king’s treasuries.
that is when hezekiah cut off the gold that he had put on the doors and doorposts of the lord’s temple and gave it to the king of assyria.
the king of assyria sent his three most important officers with a large army to king hezekiah in jerusalem.
they left lachish and went to jerusalem.
they stood near the aqueduct by the upper pool, on the street that leads up to laundryman’s field.
these men called for the king, but eliakim son of hilkiah, shebna, and joah son of asaph went out to meet them.
eliakim was the palace manager, joah was the record keeper, and shebna was the royal secretary.
the commander said to them, “tell hezekiah this is what the great king, the king of assyria says: ‘what are you trusting in to help you?
if you say, “i trust in power and great battle plans,” then that is useless.
now i ask you, who do you trust so much that you are willing to rebel against me?
are you depending on egypt to help you?
egypt is like a broken walking stick.
if you lean on it for support, it will only hurt you and make a hole in your hand.
pharaoh, the king of egypt, cannot be trusted by anyone who depends on him for help.
maybe you will say, “we trust the lord our god to help us.” but i know that hezekiah destroyed the altars and high places where people worshiped the lord.
hezekiah told the people of judah and jerusalem, “you must worship only at this one altar here in jerusalem.” 
‘if you still want to fight my master, the king of assyria, i will make this agreement with you.
i promise that i will give you 2000 horses if you can find enough men to ride them into battle.
but even then you couldn’t beat one of my master’s lowest ranking officers.
so why do you still depend on egypt’s chariots and horse soldiers?
‘now, do you think i came to this country to destroy it without the lord’s help?
no, the lord said to me, “go up against this country and destroy it!”’” 
then eliakim son of hilkiah, shebna, and joah said to the commander, “please speak to us in aramaic.
we understand that language.
don’t speak to us in the language of judah because the people on the wall will understand you.” 
but the commander said, “my master sent me to speak to everyone, not just to you and your master.
i must also speak to those people sitting there on the wall.
when we surround your city, they will suffer too.
like you, they will become so hungry they will eat their own waste and drink their own urine!” 
then the commander, shouting loudly in hebrew, gave this warning to them all: hear this message from the great king, the king of assyria!
this is what the king says: don’t let hezekiah fool you!
he cannot save you from my power.
don’t listen to him when he tells you to trust in the lord.
don’t believe him when he says, “the lord will save us.
he will not let the king of assyria defeat the city.” 
don’t listen to hezekiah!
this is what the king of assyria says: come out here and show me that you want peace.
then you will all be free to have grapes from your own vines, figs from your own trees, and water from your own well.
after some time, i will come and take you to a land like your own.
in that new land, you will have plenty of grain for making bread and vineyards for producing wine.
i am offering you a choice to live instead of dying.
don’t believe hezekiah when he tells you, “the lord will save us.” he is wrong.
did any of the gods of other nations save their land from the king of assyria?
when i destroyed the cities of hamath and arpad, where were their gods?
what about the gods of sepharvaim, hena, and ivvah?
were any gods able to save samaria from my power?
none of the gods of these other places were able to save their land from me!
so why do you think the lord can save jerusalem from me?
but the people were silent.
they did not say a word to the commander, because king hezekiah had commanded them, “don’t say anything to him.” 
then the palace manager (eliakim son of hilkiah), the royal secretary (shebna), and the record keeper (joah son of asaph) went to hezekiah.
their clothes were torn to show they were upset.
they told hezekiah everything the assyrian commander had said.
2 chronicles.
chapter 4.
he made a bronze altar that was 20 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 10 cubits tall.
then he made a large tank from melted bronze.
it was round and it measured 10 cubits across from edge to edge.
it was 5 cubits tall and about 30 cubits around.
there were images of bulls under the lip of the large bronze tank.
they were in two rows that went 10 cubits around the tank.
the bulls were molded in place when the tank was shaped.
the large bronze tank was on top of twelve large statues of bulls.
three bulls looked toward the north.
three bulls looked toward the west.
three bulls looked toward the south.
three bulls looked toward the east.
the large bronze tank was on top of these bulls.
all the bulls stood with their rear ends to each other and to the center.
the large bronze tank was 3 inches thick.
the edge of the large tank was like the edge of a cup.
the edge looked like a lily blossom.
the tank could hold about 17,400 gallons.
he made ten basins.
he put five basins on the right side of the large bronze tank and five basins on the left side.
these ten basins were to be used to wash the things offered for the burnt offerings.
but the large bronze tank was to be used by the priests for washing before they offered sacrifices.
he made ten lampstands of gold.
he followed the plans made for these lampstands.
he put the lampstands in the temple.
there were five lampstands on the right side and five lampstands on the left side.
he made ten tables and put them in the temple.
five tables were on the right side and five tables on the left side in the temple.
and he used gold to make 100 basins.
he also made the priests’ courtyard, the large courtyard, and the doors that open to them.
he used bronze to cover these doors.
then he put the large bronze tank on the right side of the temple on the southeast side.
huram also made the pots, shovels, and basins.
so he finished his work for king solomon on god’s temple: 
2 columns; 2 capitals shaped like bowls for the top of the columns; 2 nets to go around the capitals; 400 pomegranates for the two nets (two rows of pomegranates for each net to cover the two bowls for the capitals on top of the columns); 10 carts with a bowl on each cart; the large tank with 12 bulls under it; the pots, small shovels, small bowls, and all the dishes for the lord’s temple.
all the things that huram made for king solomon were made of polished bronze.
king solomon first poured these things in clay molds.
the molds were made in the jordan valley between the towns of succoth and zeredah.
solomon made so many of them that no one tried to weigh the bronze used.
solomon also made the dishes and things for god’s temple.
he made the golden altar and the tables where they put the bread of the presence.
he made the lamps and lampstands of pure gold.
these were put inside the holy place in front of the most holy place.
he used pure gold to make the flowers, lamps, and tongs.
he used pure gold to make the lamp snuffers, bowls, pans, and the censers.
he used pure gold to make the doors for the temple, the inside doors for the most holy place and the doors for the main hall.
2 chronicles.
chapter 8.
it took 20 years for king solomon to build the lord’s temple and the king’s palace.
then solomon rebuilt the towns that hiram gave him and then moved israelites into those towns to live there.
after this solomon went to hamath of zobah and captured it.
he also built the town of tadmor in the desert.
he built all the towns in hamath to store things in.
he rebuilt the towns of upper beth horon and lower beth horon.
he made them into strong forts with strong walls, gates, and bars in the gates.
he also rebuilt the town of baalath and all the other towns where he stored things.
he built all the cities where the chariots were kept and where the horse riders lived.
solomon built all he wanted in jerusalem, lebanon, and in all the country where he was king.
there were many people left in the land who were not israelites.
there were hittites, amorites, perizzites, hivites, and jebusites.
the israelites had not been able to destroy them, but solomon forced them to work for him as slaves.
they are still slaves today.
solomon did not force any of the israelites to be his slaves.
they were soldiers, government officials, officers, captains, and chariot commanders and drivers.
there were 250 supervisors over solomon’s projects.
they supervised the men.
solomon brought pharaoh’s daughter up from the city of david to the house he built for her.
he said, “my wife must not live in king david’s palace because the places where the lord’s holy box has been are holy places.” 
then solomon offered burnt offerings to the lord on the lord’s altar.
he built that altar in front of the temple porch.
solomon offered sacrifices every day the way moses commanded.
sacrifices were to be offered on sabbath days, during new moon celebrations, and at the three yearly festivals.
the three yearly festivals were the festival of unleavened bread, the festival of harvest, and the festival of shelters.
solomon followed his father david’s instructions.
he chose the groups of priests for their service and the levites for their duties.
the levites were to lead the praise and help the priests from day to day to do what needed to be done in the temple service.
and he chose the gatekeepers by their groups to serve at each gate.
this is the way david, the man of god, instructed.
the israelites did not change or disobey any of solomon’s instructions to the priests and levites.
they did not change any of the instructions, even in the way they should keep the valuable things.
so solomon completed his work on the lord’s temple.
work began the day they laid the foundation and continued without stopping until the day the temple was finished.
king solomon also built ships at ezion geber.
this town is near elath on the shore of the red sea, in the land of edom.
hiram sent ships to solomon.
hiram’s own men sailed the ships.
they were skilled at sailing on the sea.
his men went with solomon’s servants to ophir and brought back 17 tons of gold to king solomon.
chapter 23.
balaam said, “build seven altars here.
and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.” 
balak did what balaam asked.
then balak and balaam killed a ram and a bull on each of the altars.
then balaam said to balak, “stay here near this altar.
i will go to another place.
then the lord will come to me, and he will tell me what i must say.” then balaam went away to a higher place.
god came to balaam at that place, and balaam said, “i have prepared seven altars.
and i have killed a bull and a ram as a sacrifice on each altar.” 
then the lord gave balaam a message for balak and said, “go back to balak and say the things that i have given you to say.” 
so balaam went back to balak.
balak was still standing near the altar, and all the leaders of moab were standing there with them.
then balaam spoke, and this was his message: “balak, the king of moab, brought me here from the eastern mountains of aram.
balak said to me, ‘come, curse jacob for me.
come, speak against the israelites.’ 
but god is not against them, so i cannot speak against them either!
the lord has not asked for bad things to happen to these people.
so i cannot do that either.
i see these people from the mountain.
i see them from the high hills.
they live alone.
they are not part of another nation.
who can count jacob’s people?
they are as many as the grains of dust.
no one can count even a fourth of the israelites.
let me die like a good man.
let my life end as happy as theirs!” 
balak said to balaam, “what have you done to me?
i brought you here to curse my enemies, but you have blessed them!” 
but balaam answered, “i must say the things that the lord tells me to say.” 
then balak said to him, “so come with me to another place.
at that place you can see more of these people.
you cannot see all of them—you can only see part of them.
maybe from that place you can curse them for me.” 
so balak led balaam to watchmen hills.
this was on top of mount pisgah.
there balak built seven altars and killed a bull and a ram on each altar as a sacrifice.
then balaam said to balak, “stay here by this altar while i go meet with god over there.” 
so the lord came to balaam and told balaam what to say.
then he told balaam to go back to balak and say these things.
so balaam went to balak.
balak was still standing near the altar.
the leaders of moab were there with him.
balak saw balaam coming and said, “what did the lord say?” 
then balaam said this: “stand up, balak, and listen to me.
hear me, balak son of zippor.
god is not a man; he will not lie.
god is not a human being; his decisions will not change.
if he says he will do something, then he will do it.
if he makes a promise, then he will do what he promised.
he told me to bless them.
he blessed them, so i cannot change that.
god saw no wrong in jacob’s people.
he saw no sin in the israelites.
the lord is their god, and he is with them.
the great king is with them!
